95. Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the
duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.—(1) While the office of Speaker
is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or,
if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the House of
the People as the President may appoint for the purpose.
       (2) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the House of the
People the Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined
by the rules of procedure of the House, or, if no such person is present, such other
person as may be determined by the House, shall act as Speaker.
43                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

96. The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.—(1) At any
sitting of the House of the People, while any resolution for the removal of the
Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any
resolution for the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under
consideration, the Deputy Speaker, shall not, though he is present, preside, and
the provisions of clause (2) of article 95 shall apply in relation to every such
sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker, or, as the
case may be, the Deputy Speaker, is absent.
       (2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take
part in the proceedings of, the House of the People while any resolution for his
removal from office is under consideration in the House and shall,
notwithstanding anything in article 100, be entitled to vote only in the first
instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but
not in the case of an equality of votes.

97. Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman
and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.—There shall be paid to the Chairman
and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, and to the Speaker and the
Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, such salaries and allowances as may
be respectively fixed by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so
made, such salaries and allowances as are specified in the Second Schedule.

98. Secretariat of Parliament.—(1) Each House of Parliament shall
have a separate secretarial staff:
       Provided that nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the
creation of posts common to both Houses of Parliament.
      (2) Parliament may by law regulate the recruitment, and the conditions
of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of either House of
Parliament.
       (3) Until provision is made by Parliament under clause (2), the President
may, after consultation with the Speaker of the House of the People or the
Chairman of the Council of States, as the case may be, make rules regulating
the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the
secretarial staff of the House of the People or the Council of States, and any
rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any law made under
the said clause.
44                        THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
                                     Conduct of Business

99. Oath or affirmation by members.—Every member of either House
of Parliament shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe before the
President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.

100. Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding
vacancies and quorum.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution,
all questions at any sitting of either House or joint sitting of the Houses shall be
determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other
than the Speaker or person acting as Chairman or Speaker.
        The Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the
first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an
equality of votes.
       (2) Either House of Parliament shall have power to act notwithstanding
any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings in Parliament shall
be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who
was not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.
         [(3) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the quorum to
constitute a meeting of either House of Parliament shall be one-tenth of the
total number of members of the House.
      (4) If at any time during a meeting of a House there is no quorum, it shall
be the duty of the Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, either to
adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.]
                               Disqualifications of Members

101. Vacation of seats.— (1) No person shall be a member of both
Houses of Parliament and provision shall be made by Parliament by law for the
vacation by a person who is chosen a member of both Houses of his seat in one
House or the other.
45                       THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       (2) No person shall be a member both of Parliament and of a House of
the Legislature of a State 1***, and if a person is chosen a member both of
Parliament and of a House of the Legislature of 2[a State], then, at the
expiration of such period as may be specified in rules made by the President,
that person’s seat in Parliament shall become vacant, unless he has previously
resigned his seat in the Legislature of the State.
       (3) If a member of either House of Parliament—
            (a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in
         [clause (1) or clause (2) of article 102]; or
              [(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the
       Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, and his resignation is
       accepted by the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be,]
his seat shall thereupon become vacant:
           [Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in sub-clause (b),
if from information received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he
thinks fit, the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, is satisfied that
such resignation is not voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such
resignation.]
       (4) If for a period of sixty days a member of either House of Parliament
is without permission of the House absent from all meetings thereof, the House
may declare his seat vacant:
       Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall
be taken of any period during which the House is prorogued or is adjourned for
more than four consecutive days.
46                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

102. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of
Parliament—
            [(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India
       or the Government of any State, other than an office declared by
       Parliament by law not to disqualify its holder;]
          (b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
       court;
           (c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
           (d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the
       citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknowledgment of
       allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;
           (e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.
      [Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause] a person shall not be
deemed to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State by reason only that he is a Minister either for the
Union or for such State.
         [(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of either House
of Parliament if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.]

[103. Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.—
(1) If any question arises as to whether a member of either House of Parliament
has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of
article 102, the question shall be referred for the decision of the President and
his decision shall be final.
47                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
      (2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall
obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such
opinion.]

104. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation
under article 99 or when not qualified or when disqualified.—If a person
sits or votes as a member of either House of Parliament before he has complied
with the requirements of article 99, or when he knows that he is not qualified or
that he is disqualified for membership thereof, or that he is prohibited from so
doing by the provisions of any law made by Parliament, he shall be liable in
respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred
rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the Union.
       Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its Members

105. Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Parliament and of the
members and committees thereof.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this
Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of
Parliament, there shall be freedom of speech in Parliament.
       (2) No member of Parliament shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in
respect of anything said or any vote given by him in Parliament or any committee
thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the
authority of either House of Parliament of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.
        [(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of each
House of Parliament, and of the members and the committees of each House,
shall be such as may from time to time be defined by Parliament by law, and,
until so defined, 2[shall be those of that House and of its members and
committees immediately before the coming into force of section 15 of the
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978.]].
48                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
      (4) The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to
persons who by virtue of this Constitution have the right to speak in, and
otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, a House of Parliament or any
committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of Parliament.

106. Salaries and allowances of members.—Members of either House
of Parliament shall be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may
from time to time be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in
that respect is so made, allowances at such rates and upon such conditions as
were immediately before the commencement of this Constitution applicable in
the case of members of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India.
                               Legislative Procedure

107. Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.—(1) Subject
to the provisions of articles 109 and 117 with respect to Money Bills and other
financial Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of Parliament.
      (2) Subject to the provisions of articles 108 and 109, a Bill shall not be
deemed to have been passed by the Houses of Parliament unless it has been
agreed to by both Houses, either without amendment or with such amendments
only as are agreed to by both Houses.
      (3) A Bill pending in Parliament shall not lapse by reason of the
prorogation of the Houses.
       (4) A Bill pending in the Council of States which has not been passed by
the House of the People shall not lapse on a dissolution of the House of the
People.
       (5) A Bill which is pending in the House of the People, or which having
been passed by the House of the People is pending in the Council of States,
shall, subject to the provisions of article 108, lapse on a dissolution of the
House of the People.

108. Joint sitting of both Houses in certain cases.—(1) If after a Bill
has been passed by one House and transmitted to the other House—
           (a) the Bill is rejected by the other House; or
           (b) the Houses have finally disagreed as to the amendments to be
       made in the Bill; or
           (c) more than six months elapse from the date of the reception of the
       Bill by the other House without the Bill being passed by it,
49                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
the President may, unless the Bill has elapsed by reason of a dissolution of the
House of the People, notify to the Houses by message if they are sitting or by
public notification if they are not sitting, his intention to summon them to meet
in a joint sitting for the purpose of deliberating and voting on the Bill:
        Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to a Money Bill.
        (2) In reckoning any such period of six months as is referred to in
clause (1), no account shall be taken of any period during which the House
referred to in sub-clause (c) of that clause is prorogued or adjourned for more
than four consecutive days.
        (3) Where the President has under clause (1) notified his intention of
summoning the Houses to meet in a joint sitting, neither House shall proceed
further with the Bill, but the President may at any time after the date of his
notification summon the Houses to meet in a joint sitting for the purpose specified
in the notification and, if he does so, the Houses shall meet accordingly.
        (4) If at the joint sitting of the two Houses the Bill, with such amendments,
if any, as are agreed to in joint sitting, is passed by a majority of the total number
of members of both Houses present and voting, it shall be deemed for the
purposes of this Constitution to have been passed by both Houses:
        Provided that at a joint sitting—
            (a) if the Bill, having been passed by one House, has not been passed
        by the other House with amendments and returned to the House in which
        it originated, no amendment shall be proposed to the Bill other than such
        amendments (if any) as are made necessary by the delay in the passage
        of the Bill;
            (b) if the Bill has been so passed and returned, only such amendments as
        aforesaid shall be proposed to the Bill and such other amendments as are
        relevant to the matters with respect to which the Houses have not agreed,
and the decision of the person presiding as to the amendments which are admissible
under this clause shall be final.
        (5) A joint sitting may be held under this article and a Bill passed
thereat, notwithstanding that a dissolution of the House of the People has
intervened since the President notified his intention to summon the Houses to
meet therein.

109. Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.—(1) A Money Bill
shall not be introduced in the Council of States.
50                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       (2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People it
shall be transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations and the
Council of States shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its
receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the People with its
recommendations and the House of the People may thereupon either accept or
reject all or any of the recommendations of the Council of States.
       (3) If the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the
Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both
Houses with the amendments recommended by the Council of States and
accepted by the House of the People.
       (4) If the House of the People does not accept any of the
recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to
have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the
House of the People without any of the amendments recommended by the
Council of States.
       (5) If a Money Bill passed by the House of the People and transmitted to
the Council of States for its recommendations is not returned to the House of
the People within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to have
been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in
which it was passed by the House of the People.

110. Definition of “Money Bills”.—(1) For the purposes of this
Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions
dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:—
            (a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any
       tax;
            (b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any
       guarantee by the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with
       respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by
       the Government of India;
            (c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of
       India, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any
       such Fund;
            (d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India;
            (e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the
       Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such
       expenditure;
51                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
           (f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India
       or the public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or
       the audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State; or
           (g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in
       sub-clauses (a) to (f).
       (2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it
provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the
demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or
regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
       (3) If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not, the
decision of the Speaker of the House of the People thereon shall be final.
       (4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted
to the Council of States under article 109, and when it is presented to the
President for assent under article 111, the certificate of the Speaker of the
House of the People signed by him that it is a Money Bill.

111. Assent to Bills.—When a Bill has been passed by the Houses of
Parliament, it shall be presented to the President, and the President shall declare
either that he assents to the Bill, or that he withholds assent therefrom:
       Provided that the President may, as soon as possible after the
presentation to him of a Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill
to the Houses with a message requesting that they will reconsider the Bill or
any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability
of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message,
and when a Bill is so returned, the Houses shall reconsider the Bill accordingly,
and if the Bill is passed again by the Houses with or without amendment and
presented to the President for assent, the President shall not withhold assent
therefrom.
                           Procedure in Financial Matters

112. Annual financial statement.—(1) The President shall in respect of
every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a
statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India
for that year, in this Part referred to as the "annual financial statement''.
       (2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial
statement shall show separately—
52                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
               (a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this
       Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of
       India; and
               (b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be
       made from the Consolidated Fund of India,
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
       (3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India—
               (a) the emoluments and allowances of the President and other
       expenditure relating to his office;
               (b) the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy
       Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy
       Speaker of the House of the People;
               (c) debt charges for which the Government of India is liable
       including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and
       other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and
       redemption of debt;
               (d) (i) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in
       respect of Judges of the Supreme Court;
               (ii) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Federal
       Court;
               (iii) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of any High
       Court which exercises jurisdiction in relation to any area included in the
       territory of India or which at any time before the commencement of this
       Constitution exercised jurisdiction in relation to any area included in
         [a Governor's Province of the Dominion of India];
               (e) the salary, allowances and pension payable to or in respect of
       the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India;
               (f) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of
       any court or arbitral tribunal;
               (g) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution or by
       Parliament by law to be so charged.

113. Procedure in Parliament with respect to estimates.—(1) So
much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated
Fund of India shall not be submitted to the vote of Parliament, but nothing in
this clause shall be construed as preventing the discussion in either House of
Parliament of any of those estimates.
53                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       (2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be
submitted in the form of demands for grants to the House of the People, and the
House of the People shall have power to assent, or to refuse to assent, to any
demand, or to assent to any demand subject to a reduction of the amount
specified therein.
       (3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation
of the President.

114. Appropriation Bills.—(1) As soon as may be after the grants under
article 113 have been made by the House of the People, there shall be
introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund
of India of all moneys required to meet—
           (a) the grants so made by the House of the People; and
           (b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India but
       not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously
       laid before Parliament.
       (2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in either House of
Parliament which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the
destination of any grant so made or of varying the amount of any expenditure
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, and the decision of the person
presiding as to whether an amendment is inadmissible under this clause shall be
final.
       (3) Subject to the provisions of articles 115 and 116, no money shall be
withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation
made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of this article.

115. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.—(1) The President
shall—
            (a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the
       provisions of article 114 to be expended for a particular service for the
       current financial year is found to be insufficient for the purposes of that
       year or when a need has arisen during the current financial year for
       supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new service not
       contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year; or
            (b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial
       year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year,
cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament another statement
showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be presented to
the House of the People a demand for such excess, as the case may be.
54                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       (2) The provisions of articles 112, 113 and 114 shall have effect in
relation to any such statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law
to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of India to meet such expenditure or the grant in respect of such demand
as they have effect in relation to the annual financial statement and the
expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant and the law to be
made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of India to meet such expenditure or grant.

116. Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional
grants.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this
Chapter, the House of the People shall have power—
          (a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated
      expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of
      the procedure prescribed in article 113 for the voting of such grant and
      the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 114 in
      relation to that expenditure;
         (b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the
      resources of India when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite
      character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details
      ordinarily given in an annual financial statement;
         (c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current
      service of any financial year,
and Parliament shall have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from
the Consolidated Fund of India for the purposes for which the said grants are made.
       (2) The provisions of articles 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to
the making of any grant under clause (1) and to any law to be made under that
clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any
expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made
for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund
of India to meet such expenditure.