30. Right of minorities to establish and administer educational
institutions.—(1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall
have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their
choice.
16                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
         [(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory acquisition of
any property of an educational institution established and administered by a
minority, referred to in clause (1), the State shall ensure that the amount fixed
by or determined under such law for the acquisition of such property is such as
would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause.]
       (2) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions,
discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is under
the management of a minority, whether based on religion or language.
               *                    *                    *                     *

31. [Compulsory acquisition of property.].—Omitted by the Constitution
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 6 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
                                  [Saving of Certain Laws]

[31A. Saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc.—
 [(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law providing
for—
           (a) the acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights therein
       or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights; or
          (b) the taking over of the management of any property by the State
       for a limited period either in the public interest or in order to secure the
       proper management of the property; or
           (c) the amalgamation of two or more corporations either in the public
       interest or in order to secure the proper management of any of the
       corporations; or
          (d) the extinguishment or modification of any rights of managing
       agents, secretaries and treasurers, managing directors, directors or
       managers of corporations, or of any voting rights of shareholders
       thereof; or
17                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
           (e) the extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing by
       virtue of any agreement, lease or licence for the purpose of searching for,
       or winning, any mineral or mineral oil, or the premature termination or
       cancellation of any such agreement, lease or licence,
shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes
away or abridges any of the rights conferred by 1[article 14 or article 19]:
      Provided that where such law is a law made by the Legislature of a State,
the provisions of this article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having
been reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his assent:]
         [Provided further that where any law makes any provision for the
acquisition by the State of any estate and where any land comprised therein is
held by a person under his personal cultivation, it shall not be lawful for the
State to acquire any portion of such land as is within the ceiling limit applicable
to him under any law for the time being in force or any building or structure
standing thereon or appurtenant thereto, unless the law relating to the
acquisition of such land, building or structure, provides for payment of
compensation at a rate which shall not be less than the market value thereof.]
        (2) In this article,—
            [(a) the expression “estate” shall, in relation to any local area, have
       the same meaning as that expression or its local equivalent has in the
       existing law relating to land tenures in force in that area and shall also
       include—
               (i) any jagir, inam or muafi or other similar grant and in the States
           of 4[Tamil Nadu] and Kerala, any janmam right;
               (ii) any land held under ryotwari settlement;
              (iii) any land held or let for purposes of agriculture or for
           purposes ancillary thereto, including waste land, forest land, land for
           pasture or sites of buildings and other structures occupied by
           cultivators of land, agricultural labourers and village artisans;]
18                      THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
          (b) the expression “rights”, in relation to an estate, shall include any
       rights vesting in a proprietor, sub-proprietor, under-proprietor, tenure-
       holder, 1[raiyat, under-raiyat] or other intermediary and any rights or
       privileges in respect of land revenue.]

[31B. Validation of certain Acts and Regulations.—Without
prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in article 31A, none of
the Acts and Regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule nor any of the
provisions thereof shall be deemed to be void, or ever to have become void, on
the ground that such Act, Regulation or provision is inconsistent with, or takes
away or abridges any of the rights conferred by, any provisions of this Part, and
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court or Tribunal to the
contrary, each of the said Acts and Regulations shall, subject to the power of
any competent Legislature to repeal or amend it, continue in force.]

[31C. Saving of laws giving effect to certain directive principles.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law giving effect to the
policy of the State towards securing 4[all or any of the principles laid down in
Part IV] shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or
takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by 5[article 14 or article 19;]
  [and no law containing a declaration that it is for giving effect to such policy
shall be called in question in any court on the ground that it does not give effect
to such policy]:
       Provided that where such law is made by the Legislature of a State, the
provisions of this article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having been
reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his assent.]

31D. [Saving of laws in respect of anti-national activities.].—Omitted
by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act,1977, s. 2 (w.e.f.13-4-1978).
19                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
                         Right to Constitutional Remedies

32. Remedies for enforcement of rights conferred by this Part.—(1)
The right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the
enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed.
       (2) The Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions or orders or
writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition,
quo warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the
enforcement of any of the rights conferred by this Part.
      (3) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the Supreme Court by
clauses (1) and (2), Parliament may by law empower any other court to exercise
within the local limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers exercisable by
the Supreme Court under clause (2).
      (4) The right guaranteed by this article shall not be suspended except as
otherwise provided for by this Constitution.

32A. [Constitutional validity of State laws not to be considered in
proceedings under article 32.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third
Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 3 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).

[33. Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this Part
in their application to Forces, etc.—Parliament may, by law, determine to what
extent any of the rights conferred by this Part shall, in their application to,—
          (a) the members of the Armed Forces; or
         (b) the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of
       public order; or
          (c) persons employed in any bureau or other organisation established
       by the State for purposes of intelligence or counter intelligence; or
          (d) person employed in, or in connection with, the telecommunication
       systems set up for the purposes of any Force, bureau or organisation
       referred to in clauses (a) to (c),
be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper discharge of their duties
and the maintenance of discipline among them.]
20                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

34. Restriction on rights conferred by this Part while martial law is
in force in any area.—Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions
of this Part, Parliament may by law indemnify any person in the service of the
Union or of a State or any other person in respect of any act done by him in
connection with the maintenance or restoration of order in any area within the
territory of India where martial law was in force or validate any sentence
passed, punishment inflicted, forfeiture ordered or other act done under martial
law in such area.

35. Legislation to give effect to the provisions of this Part.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
            (a) Parliament shall have, and the Legislature of a State shall not
        have, power to make laws—
                (i) with respect to any of the matters which under clause (3) of
            article 16, clause (3) of article 32, article 33 and article 34 may be
            provided for by law made by Parliament; and
                (ii) for prescribing punishment for those acts which are declared
            to be offences under this Part,
        and Parliament shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of this
        Constitution, make laws for prescribing punishment for the acts referred
        to in sub-clause (ii);
            (b) any law in force immediately before the commencement of this
        Constitution in the territory of India with respect to any of the matters
        referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) or providing for punishment for
        any act referred to in sub-clause (ii) of that clause shall, subject to the
        terms thereof and to any adaptations and modifications that may be made
        therein under article 372, continue in force until altered or repealed or
        amended by Parliament.
        Explanation.—In this article, the expression "law in force'' has the same
meaning as in article 372.
                  DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY

36. Definition.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “the
State” has the same meaning as in Part III.

37. Application of the principles contained in this Part.—The
provisions contained in this Part shall not be enforceable by any court, but the
principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of
the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in
making laws.

38. State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the
people.—1[(1)] The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by
securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice,
social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life.
          [(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise the inequalities in
income, and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and
opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people
residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations.]

39. Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State.—The
State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing—
                (a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an
        adequate means of livelihood;
                (b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the
        community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;
                (c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the
        concentration of wealth and means of production to the common
        detriment;
                (d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women;
                (e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and
        the tender age of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced
        by economic necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or
        strength;
22                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
              [(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop
      in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that
      childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against moral
      and material abandonment.]

[39A. Equal justice and free legal aid.—The State shall secure that the
operation of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity,
and shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes
or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not
denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities.]

40. Organisation of village panchayats.—The State shall take steps to
organise village panchayats and endow them with such powers and authority as
may be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government.

41. Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain
cases.—The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and
development, make effective provision for securing the right to work, to
education and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness
and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.

42. Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity
relief.—The State shall make provision for securing just and humane
conditions of work and for maternity relief.

43. Living wage, etc., for workers.—The State shall endeavour to
secure, by suitable legislation or economic organisation or in any other way, to
all workers, agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage,
conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of
leisure and social and cultural opportunities and, in particular, the State shall
endeavour to promote cottage industries on an individual or co-operative basis
in rural areas.

[43A. Participation of workers in management of industries.—The
State shall take steps, by suitable legislation or in any other way, to secure the
participation of workers in the management of undertakings, establishments or
other organisations engaged in any industry.]
23                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

[43B. Promotion of co-operative societies.—The State shall endeavour
to promote voluntary formation, autonomous functioning, democratic control
and professional management of co-operative societies.]

44. Uniform civil code for the citizens.—The State shall endeavour to
secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.

[45. Provision for early childhood care and education to children
below the age of six years.—The State shall endeavour to provide early
childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of six
years.]

46. Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections.—The State shall
promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker
sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of
exploitation.

47. Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard
of living and to improve public health.—The State shall regard the raising of
the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the
improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the
State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for
medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to
health.

48. Organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry.—The State
shall endeavour to organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and
scientific lines and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and improving
the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch
and draught cattle.

[48A. Protection and improvement of environment and
safeguarding of forests and wild life.—The State shall endeavour to protect
and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the
country.]
24                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

49. Protection of monuments and places and objects of national
importance.—It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every monument
or place or object of artistic or historic interest, 1[declared by or under law
made by Parliament] to be of national importance, from spoliation,
disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may be.

50. Separation of judiciary from executive.—The State shall take steps
to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State.

51. Promotion of international peace and security.—The State shall
endeavour to—
             (a) promote international peace and security;
             (b) maintain just and honourable relations between nations;
            (c) foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the
      dealings of organised peoples with one another; and
             (d) encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.
                                           [PART IVA
                               FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES

51A. Fundamental duties.—It shall be the duty of every citizen of
India—
              (a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and
      institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem;
              (b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our
      national struggle for freedom;
              (c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of
      India;
              (d) to defend the country and render national service when called
      upon to do so;
              (e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood
      amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and
      regional or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the
      dignity of women;
              (f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite
      culture;
              (g) to protect and improve the natural environment including
      forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living
      creatures;
              (h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of
      inquiry and reform;
              (i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
              (j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and
      collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of
      endeavour and achievement; ]
                [(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for
      education to his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of
      six and fourteen years.]
                                   THE UNION
                            CHAPTER I.—THE EXECUTIVE
                          The President and Vice-President

52. The President of India.—There shall be a President of India.

53. Executive power of the Union.—(1) The executive power of the Union
shall be vested in the President and shall be exercised by him either directly or
through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.
       (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the
supreme command of the Defence Forces of the Union shall be vested in the
President and the exercise thereof shall be regulated by law.
       (3) Nothing in this article shall—
               (a) be deemed to transfer to the President any functions conferred
       by any existing law on the Government of any State or other authority; or
               (b) prevent Parliament from conferring by law functions on
       authorities other than the President.

54. Election of President.—The President shall be elected by the
members of an electoral college consisting of—
               (a) the elected members of both Houses of Parliament; and
               (b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
         [Explanation.—In this article and in article 55, “State” includes the
National Capital Territory of Delhi and the Union territory of *Puducherry.]

55. Manner of election of President.—(1) As far as practicable, there
shall be uniformity in the scale of representation of the different States at the
election of the President.
       (2) For the purpose of securing such uniformity among the States inter se
as well as parity between the States as a whole and the Union, the number of
votes which each elected member of Parliament and of the Legislative
Assembly of each State is entitled to cast at such election shall be determined in
the following manner:—
           (a) every elected member of the Legislative Assembly of a State shall
       have as many votes as there are multiples of one thousand in the quotient
       obtained by dividing the population of the State by the total number of
       the elected members of the Assembly;
27                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
           (b) if, after taking the said multiples of one thousand, the remainder is
       not less than five hundred, then the vote of each member referred to in
       sub-clause (a) shall be further increased by one;
           (c) each elected member of either House of Parliament shall have
       such number of votes as may be obtained by dividing the total number of
       votes assigned to the members of the Legislative Assemblies of the
       States under sub-clauses (a) and (b) by the total number of the elected
       members of both Houses of Parliament, fractions exceeding one-half
       being counted as one and other fractions being disregarded.
       (3) The election of the President shall be held in accordance with the
system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote
and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot.
         [Explanation.—In this article, the expression “population” means the
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant
figures have been published:
       Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding
census of which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the
relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2[2026] have been
published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.]

56. Term of office of President.—(1) The President shall hold office for
a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
       Provided that—
           (a) the President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
       Vice-President, resign his office;
           (b) the President may, for violation of the Constitution, be removed
       from office by impeachment in the manner provided in article 61;
           (c) the President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term,
       continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
       (2) Any resignation addressed to the Vice-President under clause (a) of
the proviso to clause (1) shall forthwith be communicated by him to the
Speaker of the House of the People.
28                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

57. Eligibility for re-election.—A person who holds, or who has held,
office as President shall, subject to the other provisions of this Constitution, be
eligible for re-election to that office.

58. Qualifications for election as President.—(1) No person shall be
eligible for election as President unless he—
           (a) is a citizen of India,
           (b) has completed the age of thirty-five years, and
           (c) is qualified for election as a member of the House of the People.
        (2) A person shall not be eligible for election as President if he holds
any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any
State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the
said Governments.
       Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be
deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the President or
Vice-President of the Union or the Governor 1*** of any State or is a Minister
either for the Union or for any State.

59. Conditions of President's office.—(1) The President shall not be a
member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any
State, and if a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the
Legislature of any State be elected President, he shall be deemed to have
vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon his office as
President.
       (2) The President shall not hold any other office of profit.
       (3) The President shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use of
his official residences and shall be also entitled to such emoluments,
allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law and,
until provision in that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances and
privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule.
       (4) The emoluments and allowances of the President shall not be
diminished during his term of office.

60. Oath or affirmation by the President.—Every President and every
person acting as President or discharging the functions of the President shall,
before entering upon his office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief
Justice of India or, in his absence, the senior-most Judge of the Supreme Court
available, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to say—
29                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       "I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will faithfully execute the office
                       solemnly affirm
of President (or discharge the functions of the President) of India and will to the best
of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the law and that
I will devote myself to the service and well-being of the people of India.".

61. Procedure for impeachment of the President.—(1) When a
President is to be impeached for violation of the Constitution, the charge shall
be preferred by either House of Parliament.
       (2) No such charge shall be preferred unless—
           (a) the proposal to prefer such charge is contained in a resolution
       which has been moved after at least fourteen days' notice in writing
       signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members of the
       House has been given of their intention to move the resolution, and
           (b) such resolution has been passed by a majority of not less than
       two-thirds of the total membership of the House.
       (3) When a charge has been so preferred by either House of Parliament,
the other House shall investigate the charge or cause the charge to be
investigated and the President shall have the right to appear and to be
represented at such investigation.
       (4) If as a result of the investigation a resolution is passed by a majority
of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House by which the
charge was investigated or caused to be investigated, declaring that the charge
preferred against the President has been sustained, such resolution shall have
the effect of removing the President from his office as from the date on which
the resolution is so passed.