244. Administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas.—(1) The
provisions of the Fifth Schedule shall apply to the administration and control of
the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes in any State 1*** other than 2[the
States of Assam, 3[, 4[Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram]]].
      (2) The provisions of the Sixth Schedule shall apply to the
administration of the tribal areas in 2[the States of Assam, 3[, 5[Meghalaya,
Tripura and Mizoram]]].

[244A. Formation of an autonomous State comprising certain tribal
areas in Assam and creation of local Legislature or Council of Ministers or
both therefor.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament
may, by law, form within the State of Assam an autonomous State comprising
(whether wholly or in part) all or any of the tribal areas specified in 7[Part I] of
the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule and create therefor—
              (a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated and partly
       elected, to function as a Legislature for the autonomous State, or
               (b) a Council of Ministers,
or both with such constitution, powers and functions, in each case, as may be
specified in the law.
        (2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) may, in particular,—
144                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
             (a) specify the matters enumerated in the State List or the
      Concurrent List with respect to which the Legislature of the autonomous
      State shall have power to make laws for the whole or any part thereof,
      whether to the exclusion of the Legislature of the State of Assam or
      otherwise;
               (b) define the matters with respect to which the executive power
       of the autonomous State shall extend;
               (c) provide that any tax levied by the State of Assam shall be
       assigned to the autonomous State in so far as the proceeds thereof are
       attributable to the autonomous State;
               (d) provide that any reference to a State in any article of this
       Constitution shall be construed as including a reference to the
       autonomous State; and
              (e) make such supplemental, incidental and consequential
       provisions as may be deemed necessary.
        (3) An amendment of any such law as aforesaid in so far as such
amendment relates to any of the matters specified in sub-clause (a) or
sub-clause (b) of clause (2) shall have no effect unless the amendment is passed
in each House of Parliament by not less than two-thirds of the members present
and voting.
        (4) Any such law as is referred to in this article shall not be deemed to
be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has the effect
of amending this Constitution.]
           RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES
                      CHAPTER I.—LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS
                           Distribution of Legislative Powers

245. Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of
States.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may
make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India, and the
Legislature of a State may make laws for the whole or any part of the State.
       (2) No law made by Parliament shall be deemed to be invalid on the
ground that it would have extra-territorial operation.

246. Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the
Legislatures of States.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3),
Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters
enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as
the “Union List”).
       (2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament, and, subject to
clause (1), the Legislature of any State 1*** also, have power to make laws
with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List III in the Seventh
Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the “Concurrent List”).
       (3) Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of any State 1*** has
exclusive power to make laws for such State or any part thereof with respect to
any of the matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule (in this
Constitution referred to as the “State List”).
       (4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for
any part of the territory of India not included 2[in a State] notwithstanding that
such matter is a matter enumerated in the State List.

[246A. Special provision with respect to goods and services tax.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in articles 246 and 254, Parliament, and,
subject to clause (2), the Legislature of every State, have power to make laws
with respect to goods and services tax imposed by the Union or by such State.
146                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
        (2) Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to goods
and services tax where the supply of goods, or of services, or both takes place
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
        Explanation.—The provisions of this article, shall, in respect of goods
and services tax referred to in clause (5) of article 279A, take effect from the
date recommended by the Goods and Services Tax Council.]

247. Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certain
additional courts.—Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, Parliament may
by law provide for the establishment of any additional courts for the better
administration of laws made by Parliament or of any existing laws with respect
to a matter enumerated in the Union List.

248. Residuary powers of legislation.—(1) 1[Subject to article 246A,
Parliament] has exclusive power to make any law with respect to any matter
not enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List.
        (2) Such power shall include the power of making any law imposing a
tax not mentioned in either of those Lists.

249. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the
State List in the national interest.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, if the Council of States has declared by
resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and
voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest that Parliament
should make laws with respect to 2[goods and services tax provided under article
246A or] any matter enumerated in the State List specified in the resolution, it
shall be lawful for Parliament to make laws for the whole or any part of the
territory of India with respect to that matter while the resolution remains in force.
        (2) A resolution passed under clause (1) shall remain in force for such
period not exceeding one year as may be specified therein:
        Provided that, if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance
in force of any such resolution is passed in the manner provided in clause (1),
such resolution shall continue in force for a further period of one year from the
date on which under this clause it would otherwise have ceased to be in force.
        (3) A law made by Parliament which Parliament would not but for the
passing of a resolution under clause (1) have been competent to make shall, to the
extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of
six months after the resolution has ceased to be in force, except as respects things
done or omitted to be done before the expiration of the said period.
147                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

250. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in
the State List if a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, Parliament shall, while a
Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, have power to make laws for the
whole or any part of the territory of India with respect to 1[goods and services
tax provided under article 246A or] any of the matters enumerated in the State
List.
       (2) A law made by Parliament which Parliament would not but for the
issue of a Proclamation of Emergency have been competent to make shall, to the
extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of
six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate, except as respects things
done or omitted to be done before the expiration of the said period.

251. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament under articles
249 and 250 and laws made by the Legislatures of States.—Nothing in
articles 249 and 250 shall restrict the power of the Legislature of a State to
make any law which under this Constitution it has power to make, but if any
provision of a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to any
provision of a law made by Parliament which Parliament has under either of the
said articles power to make, the law made by Parliament, whether passed
before or after the law made by the Legislature of the State, shall prevail, and
the law made by the Legislature of the State shall to the extent of the
repugnancy, but so long only as the law made by Parliament continues to have
effect, be inoperative.

252. Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by
consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State.—(1) If it
appears to the Legislatures of two or more States to be desirable that any of the
matters with respect to which Parliament has no power to make laws for the
States except as provided in articles 249 and 250 should be regulated in such
States by Parliament by law, and if resolutions to that effect are passed by all
the Houses of the Legislatures of those States, it shall be lawful for Parliament
to pass an act for regulating that matter accordingly, and any Act so passed
shall apply to such States and to any other State by which it is adopted
afterwards by resolution passed in that behalf by the House or, where there are
two Houses, by each of the Houses of the Legislature of that State.
148                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
        (2) Any Act so passed by Parliament may be amended or repealed by an
Act of Parliament passed or adopted in like manner but shall not, as respects
any State to which it applies, be amended or repealed by an Act of the
Legislature of that State.

253. Legislation for giving effect to international agreements.—
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter,
Parliament has power to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory
of India for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other
country or countries or any decision made at any international conference,
association or other body.

254. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made
by the Legislatures of States.—(1) If any provision of a law made by the
Legislature of a State is repugnant to any provision of a law made by
Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, or to any provision of an
existing law with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent
List, then, subject to the provisions of clause (2), the law made by Parliament,
whether passed before or after the law made by the Legislature of such State,
or, as the case may be, the existing law, shall prevail and the law made by the
Legislature of the State shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void.
        (2) Where a law made by the Legislature of a State 1*** with respect to
one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List contains any provision
repugnant to the provisions of an earlier law made by Parliament or an existing
law with respect to that matter, then, the law so made by the Legislature of such
State shall, if it has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has
received his assent, prevail in that State:
        Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent Parliament from
enacting at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a law
adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislature
of the State.

255. Requirements as to recommendations and previous sanctions to
be regarded as matters of procedure only.—No Act of Parliament or of the
Legislature of a State 1***, and no provision in any such Act, shall be invalid
by reason only that some recommendation or previous sanction required by this
Constitution was not given, if assent to that Act was given—
149                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
              (a) where the recommendation required was that of the Governor,
       either by the Governor or by the President;
              (b) where the recommendation required was that of the
       Rajpramukh, either by the Rajpramukh or by the President;
              (c) where the recommendation or previous sanction required was
       that of the President, by the President.
                    CHAPTER II.—ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS
                                      General

256. Obligation of States and the Union.—The executive power of every
State shall be so exercised as to ensure compliance with the laws made by
Parliament and any existing laws which apply in that State, and the executive
power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to a State as may
appear to the Government of India to be necessary for that purpose:

257. Control of the Union over States in certain cases.—(1) The
executive power of every State shall be so exercised as not to impede or
prejudice the exercise of the executive power of the Union, and the executive
power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to a State as
may appear to the Government of India to be necessary for that purpose.
       (2) The executive power of the Union shall also extend to the giving of
directions to a State as to the construction and maintenance of means of
communication declared in the direction to be of national or military
importance:
       Provided that nothing in this clause shall be taken as restricting the
power of Parliament to declare highways or waterways to be national highways
or national waterways or the power of the Union with respect to the highways
or waterways so declared or the power of the Union to construct and maintain
means of communication as part of its functions with respect to naval, military
and air force works.
       (3) The executive power of the Union shall also extend to the giving of
directions to a State as to the measures to be taken for the protection of the
railways within the State.
       (4) Where in carrying out any direction given to a State under clause (2)
as to the construction or maintenance of any means of communication or under
clause (3) as to the measures to be taken for the protection of any railway, costs
have been incurred in excess of those which would have been incurred in the
discharge of the normal duties of the State if such direction had not been given,
there shall be paid by the Government of India to the State such sum as may be
agreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator
appointed by the Chief Justice of India, in respect of the extra costs so incurred
by the State.
150                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

[257A. [Assistance to States by deployment of armed forces or other
forces of the Union.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 33 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).]

258. Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on States in certain
cases.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may,
with the consent of the Government of a State, entrust either conditionally or
unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any
matter to which the executive power of the Union extends.
       (2) A law made by Parliament which applies in any State may,
notwithstanding that it relates to a matter with respect to which the Legislature
of the State has no power to make laws, confer powers and impose duties, or
authorise the conferring of powers and the imposition of duties, upon the State
or officers and authorities thereof.
       (3) Where by virtue of this article powers and duties have been conferred
or imposed upon a State or officers or authorities thereof, there shall be paid by
the Government of India to the State such sum as may be agreed, or, in default
of agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief
Justice of India, in respect of any extra costs of administration incurred by the
State in connection with the exercise of those powers and duties.

[258A. Power of the States to entrust functions to the Union.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Governor of a State may,
with the consent of the Government of India, entrust either conditionally or
unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any
matter to which the executive power of the State extends.]

[259. Armed Forces in States in Part B of the First Schedule.].—
Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

260. Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside
India.—The Government of India may by agreement with the Government of
any territory not being part of the territory of India undertake any executive,
legislative or judicial functions vested in the Government of such territory, but
every such agreement shall be subject to, and governed by, any law relating to
the exercise of foreign jurisdiction for the time being in force.
151                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

261. Public acts, records and judicial proceedings.—(1) Full faith and
credit shall be given throughout the territory of India to public acts, records and
judicial proceedings of the Union and of every State.
        (2) The manner in which and the conditions under which the acts,
records and proceedings referred to in clause (1) shall be proved and the effect
thereof determined shall be as provided by law made by Parliament.
        (3) Final judgments or orders delivered or passed by civil courts in any
part of the territory of India shall be capable of execution anywhere within that
territory according to law.
                            Disputes relating to Waters

262. Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers
or river valleys.—(1) Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication of
any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, distribution or control of the
waters of, or in, any inter-State river or river valley.
        (2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by
law provide that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall exercise
jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or complaint as is referred to in
clause (1).
                           Co-ordination between States

263. Provisions with respect to an inter-State Council.—If at any time
it appears to the President that the public interests would be served by the
establishment of a Council charged with the duty of—
               (a) inquiring into and advising upon disputes which may have
        arisen between States;
               (b) investigating and discussing subjects in which some or all of
        the States, or the Union and one or more of the States, have a common
        interest; or
               (c) making recommendations upon any such subject and, in
        particular, recommendations for the better co-ordination of policy and
        action with respect to that subject,
it shall be lawful for the President by order to establish such a Council, and to
define the nature of the duties to be performed by it and its organisation and
procedure.
              FINANCE, PROPERTY, CONTRACTS AND SUITS
                             CHAPTER I.—FINANCE
                                     General

[264. Interpretation.—In this Part, “Finance Commission” means a
Finance Commission constituted under article 280.]

265. Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law.—No tax shall
be levied or collected except by authority of law.

266. Consolidated Funds and public accounts of India and of the
States.—(1) Subject to the provisions of article 267 and to the provisions of
this Chapter with respect to the assignment of the whole or part of the net
proceeds of certain taxes and duties to States, all revenues received by the
Government of India, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of
treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by
that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be
entitled “the Consolidated Fund of India”, and all revenues received by the
Government of a State, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of
treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by
that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be
entitled “the Consolidated Fund of the State”.
       (2) All other public moneys received by or on behalf of the Government
of India or the Government of a State shall be credited to the public account of
India or the public account of the State, as the case may be.
       (3) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the
Consolidated Fund of a State shall be appropriated except in accordance with
law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Constitution.

267. Contingency Fund.—(1) Parliament may by law establish a
Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be entitled “the Contingency
Fund of India” into which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be
determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the
President to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the
purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such
expenditure by Parliament by law under article 115 or article 116.
153                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       (2) The Legislature of a State may by law establish a Contingency Fund in
the nature of an imprest to be entitled “the Contingency Fund of the State” into
which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be determined by such
law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the Governor 1*** of the
State to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of
meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the
Legislature of the State by law under article 205 or article 206.
           Distribution of Revenues between the Union and the States

268. Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropriated by
the States.—(1) Such stamp duties 2*** as are mentioned in the Union List shall
be levied by the Government of India but shall be collected—
               (a) in the case where such duties are leviable within any 3[Union
       territory], by the Government of India, and
             (b) in other cases, by the States within which such duties are
       respectively leviable.
      (2) The proceeds in any financial year of any such duty leviable within
any State shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be
assigned to that State.

268A. [Service tax levied by Union and collected and appropriated by
the Union and the States.].—Omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and
First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 7 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
154                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

269. Taxes levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the
States.—1[(1) Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods and taxes on the
consignment of goods 2[except as provided in article 269A] shall be levied and
collected by the Government of India but shall be assigned and shall be deemed
to have been assigned to the States on or after the 1st day of April, 1996 in the
manner provided in clause (2).
        Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
                (a) the expression "taxes on the sale or purchase of goods" shall
        mean taxes on sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, where
        such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or
        commerce;
                (b) the expression "taxes on the consignment of goods" shall mean
        taxes on the consignment of goods (whether the consignment is to the
        person making it or to any other person), where such consignment takes
        place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
        (2) The net proceeds in any financial year of any such tax, except in so
far as those proceeds represent proceeds attributable to Union territories, shall
not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to the
States within which that tax is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed
among those States in accordance with such principles of distribution as may be
formulated by Parliament by law.]
          [(3) Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining when a
  [sale or purchase of, or consignment of goods] takes place in the course of
inter-State trade or commerce.]

[269A. Levy and collection of goods and services tax in course of
inter-State trade or commerce.— (1) Goods and services tax on supplies in
the course of inter-State trade or commerce shall be levied and collected by the
Government of India and such tax shall be apportioned between the Union and
the States in the manner as may be provided by Parliament by law on the
recommendations of the Goods and Services Tax Council.
155                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, supply of goods, or of
services, or both in the course of import into the territory of India shall be
deemed to be supply of goods, or of services, or both in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce.
       (2) The amount apportioned to a State under clause (1) shall not form
part of the Consolidated Fund of India.
       (3) Where an amount collected as tax levied under clause (1) has been
used for payment of the tax levied by a State under article 246A, such amount
shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India.
       (4) Where an amount collected as tax levied by a State under article
246A has been used for payment of the tax levied under clause (1), such
amount shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of the State.
       (5) Parliament may, by law, formulate the principles for determining the
place of supply, and when a supply of goods, or of services, or both takes place
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.]

[270. Taxes levied and distributed between the Union and the
States.—(1) All taxes and duties referred to in the Union List, except the duties
and taxes referred to in 2[articles 268, 269 and 269A], respectively, surcharge
on taxes and duties referred to in article 271 and any cess levied for specific
purposes under any law made by Parliament shall be levied and collected by
the Government of India and shall be distributed between the Union and the
States in the manner provided in clause (2).
         [(1A) The tax collected by the Union under clause (1) of article 246A
shall also be distributed between the Union and the States in the manner
provided in clause (2).
       (1B) The tax levied and collected by the Union under clause (2) of
article 246A and article 269A, which has been used for payment of the tax
levied by the Union under clause (1) of article 246A, and the amount
apportioned to the Union under clause (1) of article 269A, shall also be
distributed between the Union and the States in the manner provided in clause
(2).]
156                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       (2) Such percentage, as may be prescribed, of the net proceeds of any
such tax or duty in any financial year shall not form part of the Consolidated
Fund of India, but shall be assigned to the States within which that tax or duty
is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed among those States in such
manner and from such time as may be prescribed in the manner provided in
clause (3).
       (3) In this article, "prescribed" means, —
            (i) until a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by
       the President by order, and
           (ii) after a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by
       the President by order after considering the recommendations of the
       Finance Commission.]