243D. Reservation of seats.—(1) Seats shall be reserved for—
           (a) the Scheduled Castes; and
           (b) the Scheduled Tribes,
in every Panchayat and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as
may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct
election in that Panchayat as the population of the Scheduled Castes in that
Panchayat area or of the Scheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area bears to the
total population of that area and such seats may be allotted by rotation to
different constituencies in a Panchayat.
       (2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under
clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as
the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
       (3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the
total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat shall be
reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in a Panchayat.
       (4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or
any other level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,
provide:
       Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in
any State shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total
number of such offices in the Panchayats at each level as the population of the
Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to
the total population of the State:
       Provided further that not less than one-third of the total number of offices
of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women:
       Provided also that the number of offices reserved under this clause shall
be allotted by rotation to different Panchayats at each level.
       (5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the reservation of
offices of Chairpersons (other than the reservation for women) under clause (4)
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334.
       (6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making
any provision for reservation of seats in any Panchayat or offices of Chairpersons in
the Panchayats at any level in favour of backward class of citizens.
122                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

243E. Duration of Panchayats, etc.—(1) Every Panchayat, unless
sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in force, shall continue for
five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer.
        (2) No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall have the
effect of causing dissolution of a Panchayat at any level, which is functioning
immediately before such amendment, till the expiration of its duration specified
in clause (1).
        (3) An election to constitute a Panchayat shall be completed—
           (a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1);
           (b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its
       dissolution:
        Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved
Panchayat would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be
necessary to hold any election under this clause for constituting the Panchayat
for such period.
       (4) A Panchayat constituted upon the dissolution of a Panchayat before
the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainder of the period
for which the dissolved Panchayat would have continued under clause (1) had it
not been so dissolved.

243F. Disqualifications for membership.— (1) A person shall be
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of a Panchayat—
           (a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in
       force for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State
       concerned:
           Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is
       less than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age of twenty-
       one years;
           (b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the
       Legislature of the State.
       (2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Panchayat has
become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the
question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in such manner
as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
123                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

243G. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.—
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by
law, endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority as may be
necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government and
such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and
responsibilities upon Panchayats at the appropriate level, subject to such
conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to—
          (a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;
           (b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and
       social justice as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to
       the matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule.

243H. Powers to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Panchayats.—
The Legislature of a State may, by law,—
           (a) authorise a Panchayat to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes,
       duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such procedure and subject to
       such limits;
           (b) assign to a Panchayat such taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and
       collected by the State Government for such purposes and subject to such
       conditions and limits;
           (c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the
       Consolidated Fund of the State; and
           (d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneys
       received, respectively, by or on behalf of the Panchayats and also for the
       withdrawal of such moneys therefrom,
as may be specified in the law.

243I. Constitution of Finance Commission to review financial
position.—(1) The Governor of a State shall, as soon as may be within one
year from the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment)
Act, 1992, and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year, constitute a
Finance Commission to review the financial position of the Panchayats and to
make recommendations to the Governor as to—
          (a) the principles which should govern—
                  (i) the distribution between the State and the Panchayats of the
              net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the
              State, which may be divided between them under this Part and the
              allocation between the Panchayats at all levels of their respective
              shares of such proceeds;
124                 THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
               (ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which
             may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the Panchayats;
                (iii) the grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated
             Fund of the State;
         (b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the
      Panchayats;
        (c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the
      Governor in the interests of sound finance of the Panchayats.
       (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the composition
of the Commission, the qualifications which shall be requisite for appointment
as members thereof and the manner in which they shall be selected.
      (3) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have such
powers in the performance of their functions as the Legislature of the State
may, by law, confer on them.
       (4) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the
Commission under this article together with an explanatory memorandum as to
the action taken thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the State.

243J. Audit of accounts of Panchayats.—The Legislature of a State
may, by law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by
the Panchayats and the auditing of such accounts.

243K. Elections to the Panchayats.—(1) The superintendence,
direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct
of, all elections to the Panchayats shall be vested in a State Election
Commission consisting of a State Election Commissioner to be appointed by
the Governor.
       (2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the Legislature of a
State, the conditions of service and tenure of office of the State Election
Commissioner shall be such as the Governor may by rule determine:
       Provided that the State Election Commissioner shall not be removed
from his office except in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of a
High Court and the conditions of service of the State Election Commissioner
shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
125                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       (3) The Governor of a State shall, when so requested by the State
Election Commission, make available to the State Election Commission such
staff as may be necessary for the discharge of the functions conferred on the
State Election Commission by clause (1).
      (4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a
State may, by law, make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in
connection with, elections to the Panchayats.

243L. Application to Union territories.—The provisions of this Part
shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union
territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor of a State were
references to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article
239 and references to the Legislature or the legislative Assembly of a State
were references, in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly,
to that Legislative Assembly:
       Provided that the President may, by public notification, direct that the
provisions of this Part shall apply to any Union territory or part thereof subject
to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the notification.

243M. Part not to apply to certain areas.—(1) Nothing in this Part
shall apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas
referred to in clause (2), of article 244.
      (2) Nothing in this Part shall apply to—
          (a) the States of Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram;
         (b) the hill areas in the State of Manipur for which District Councils
      exist under any law for the time being in force.
   (3) Nothing in this Part—
          (a) relating to Panchayats at the district level shall apply to the hill
      areas of the District of Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal for which
      Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council exists under any law for the time being
      in force;
        (b) shall be construed to affect the functions and powers of the
      Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council constituted under such law.
126                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
         [(3A) Nothing in article 243D, relating to reservation of seats for the
Scheduled Castes, shall apply to the State of Arunachal Pradesh.]
       (4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
            (a) the Legislature of a State referred to in sub-clause (a) of
       clause (2) may, by law, extend this Part to that State, except the areas, if
       any, referred to in clause (1), if the Legislative Assembly of that State
       passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total membership of
       that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members
       of that House present and voting;
            (b) Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions of this Part to the
       Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in clause (1) subject to
       such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in such law, and
       no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for
       the purposes of article 368.

243N. Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of any law relating to
Panchayats in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, which is inconsistent with
the provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or
repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the
expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier:
       Provided that all the Panchayats existing immediately before such
commencement shall continue till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner
dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of
that State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House
of the Legislature of that State.

243O. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
            (a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of
       constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or
       purporting to be made under article 243K, shall not be called in question
       in any court;
            (b) no election to any Panchayat shall be called in question except by
       an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is
       provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature of a State.
                                  [PART IXA
                             THE MUNICIPALITIES

243P. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
          (a) “Committee” means a Committee constituted under article 243S;
          (b) “district” means a district in a State;
          (c) “Metropolitan area” means an area having a population of ten
       lakhs or more, comprised in one or more districts and consisting of two
       or more Municipalities or Panchayats or other contiguous areas,
       specified by the Governor by public notification to be a Metropolitan
       area for the purposes of this Part;
          (d) “Municipal area” means the territorial area of a Municipality as is
       notified by the Governor;
          (e) “Municipality” means an institution of self-government
       constituted under article 243Q;
          (f) “Panchayat” means a Panchayat constituted under article 243B;
          (g) “population” means the population as ascertained at the last
       preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.

243Q. Constitution of Municipalities.—(1) There shall be constituted
in every State,—
          (a) a Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called) for a transitional
       area, that is to say, an area in transition from a rural area to an urban
       area;
          (b) a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area; and
          (c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area,
in accordance with the provisions of this Part:
128                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
      Provided that a Municipality under this clause may not be constituted in
such urban area or part thereof as the Governor may, having regard to the size
of the area and the municipal services being provided or proposed to be
provided by an industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as he
may deem fit, by public notification, specify to be an industrial township.
       (2) In this article, “a transitional area”, “a smaller urban area” or “a
larger urban area” means such area as the Governor may, having regard to the
population of the area, the density of the population therein, the revenue
generated for local administration, the percentage of employment in non-
agricultural activities, the economic importance or such other factors as he may
deem fit, specify by public notification for the purposes of this Part.

243R. Composition of Municipalities.—(1) Save as provided in
clause (2), all the seats in a Municipality shall be filled by persons chosen by
direct election from the territorial constituencies in the Municipal area and for
this purpose each Municipal area shall be divided into territorial constituencies
to be known as wards.
      (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide—
             (a) for the representation in a Municipality of—
                (i) persons having special knowledge or experience in
             Municipal administration;
                 (ii) the members of the House of the People and the members
             of the Legislative Assembly of the State representing
             constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the Municipal
             area;
                 (iii) the members of the Council of States and the members of
             the Legislative Council of the State registered as electors within
             the Municipal area;
                 (iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted under
             clause (5) of article 243S:
            Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph (i) shall not
      have the right to vote in the meetings of the Municipality;
             (b) the manner of election of the Chairperson of a Municipality.
129                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

243S. Constitution and composition of Wards Committees, etc.—(1)
There shall be constituted Wards Committees, consisting of one or more wards,
within the territorial area of a Municipality having a population of three lakhs
or more.
      (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect
to—
           (a) the composition and the territorial area of a Wards Committee;
          (b) the manner in which the seats in a Wards Committee shall be
      filled.
       (3) A member of a Municipality representing a ward within the territorial
area of the Wards Committee shall be a member of that Committee.
      (4) Where a Wards Committee consists of—
           (a) one ward, the member representing that ward in the Municipality;
      or
          (b) two or more wards, one of the members representing such wards
      in the Municipality elected by the members of the Wards Committee,
shall be the Chairperson of that Committee.
       (5) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the Legislature of a
State from making any provision for the constitution of Committees in addition
to the Wards Committees.

243T. Reservation of seats.—(1) Seats shall be reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every Municipality and the
number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same
proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that
Municipality as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the Municipal area or
of the Scheduled Tribes in the Municipal area bears to the total population of
that area and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies
in a Municipality.
       (2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under
clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as
the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
130                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       (3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the
total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall
be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in a Municipality.
       (4) The offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall be reserved
for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as
the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
       (5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the reservation of
offices of Chairpersons (other than the reservation for women) under clause (4)
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334.
       (6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from
making any provision for reservation of seats in any Municipality or offices of
Chairpersons in the Municipalities in favour of backward class of citizens.

243U. Duration of Municipalities, etc.—(1) Every Municipality, unless
sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in force, shall continue for
five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer:
       Provided that a Municipality shall be given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard before its dissolution.
       (2) No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall have the
effect of causing dissolution of a Municipality at any level, which is
functioning immediately before such amendment, till the expiration of its
duration specified in clause (1).
       (3) An election to constitute a Municipality shall be completed,—
           (a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1);
           (b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its
       dissolution:
       Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved
Municipality would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be
necessary to hold any election under this clause for constituting the
Municipality for such period.
       (4) A Municipality constituted upon the dissolution of a Municipality
before the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainder of the
period for which the dissolved Municipality would have continued under
clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.
131                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

243V. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of a Municipality—
           (a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force
       for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State concerned:
           Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is
       less than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age of
       twenty-one years;
           (b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the
       Legislature of the State.
       (2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Municipality has
become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the
question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in such manner
as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.

243W. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities,
etc.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State
may, by law, endow—
           (a) the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be
       necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government
       and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and
       responsibilities upon Municipalities, subject to such conditions as may
       be specified therein, with respect to—
                 (i) the preparation of plans for economic development and social
           justice;
                 (ii) the performance of functions and the implementation of
           schemes as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to
           the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule;
           (b) the Committees with such powers and authority as may be
       necessary to enable them to carry out the responsibilities conferred upon
       them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth
       Schedule.

243X. Power to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Municipalities.—
The Legislature of a State may, by law,—
           (a) authorise a Municipality to levy, collect and appropriate such
       taxes, duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such procedure and
       subject to such limits;
132                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
         (b) assign to a Municipality such taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied
      and collected by the State Government for such purposes and subject to
      such conditions and limits;
         (c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from
      the Consolidated Fund of the State; and
         (d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneys
      received, respectively, by or on behalf of the Municipalities and also for
      the withdrawal of such moneys therefrom,
as may be specified in the law.

243Y. Finance Commission.—(1) The Finance Commission constituted
under article 243I shall also review the financial position of the Municipalities
and make recommendations to the Governor as to—
          (a) the principles which should govern—
               (i) the distribution between the State and the Municipalities of
          the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the
          State, which may be divided between them under this Part and the
          allocation between the Municipalities at all levels of their respective
          shares of such proceeds;
              (ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which
          may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the Municipalities;
              (iii) the grants-in-aid to       the   Municipalities   from   the
          Consolidated Fund of the State;
        (b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the
      Municipalities;
        (c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the
      Governor in the interests of sound finance of the Municipalities.
       (2) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the
Commission under this article together with an explanatory memorandum as to
the action taken thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the State.

243Z. Audit of accounts of Municipalities.—The Legislature of a State
may, by law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by
the Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts.
133                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
        243ZA. Elections to the Municipalities.—(1) The superintendence,
direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct
of, all elections to the Municipalities shall be vested in the State Election
Commission referred to in article 243K.
        (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a
State may, by law, make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in
connection with, elections to the Municipalities.
        243ZB. Application to Union territories.—The provisions of this Part
shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union
territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor of a State were
references to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under
article 239 and references to the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of a
State were references in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative
Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly:
        Provided that the President may, by public notification, direct that the
provisions of this Part shall apply to any Union territory or part thereof subject
to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the notification.
        243ZC. Part not to apply to certain areas.—(1) Nothing in this Part
shall apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas
referred to in clause (2) of article 244.
        (2) Nothing in this Part shall be construed to affect the functions and
powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council constituted under any law for the
time being in force for the hill areas of the district of Darjeeling in the State of
West Bengal.
        (3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may, by
law, extend the provisions of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal
areas referred to in clause (1) subject to such exceptions and modifications as
may be specified in such law, and no such law shall be deemed to be an
amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.
        243ZD. Committee for district planning.—(1) There shall be
constituted in every State at the district level a District Planning Committee to
consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the
district and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole.
        (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect
to—
134                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
                (a) the composition of the District Planning Committees;
                (b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be
      filled:
             Provided that not less than four-fifths of the total number of
      members of such Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the
      elected members of the Panchayat at the district level and of the
      Municipalities in the district in proportion to the ratio between the
      population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in the district;
            (c) the functions relating to district planning which may be
      assigned to such Committees;
             (d) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees
      shall be chosen.
      (3) Every District Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft
development plan,—
                (a) have regard to—
                       (i) matters of common interest between the Panchayats and
                the Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and
                other physical and natural resources, the integrated development
                of infrastructure and environmental conservation;
                      (ii) the extent and type of available resources whether
                financial or otherwise;
            (b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor
      may, by order, specify.
       (4) The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall forward
the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the Government
of the State.
       243ZE. Committee for Metropolitan planning.—(1) There shall be
constituted in every Metropolitan area a Metropolitan Planning Committee to
prepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole.
      (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to—
                (a) the composition of the Metropolitan Planning Committees;
                (b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled:
135                 THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
            Provided that not less than two-thirds of the members of such
      Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members
      of the Municipalities and Chairpersons of the Panchayats in the
      Metropolitan area in proportion to the ratio between the population of
      the Municipalities and of the Panchayats in that area;
             (c) the representation in such Committees of the Government of
      India and the Government of the State and of such organisations and
      institutions as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the functions
      assigned to such Committees;
           (d) the functions relating to planning and coordination for the
      Metropolitan area which may be assigned to such Committees;
             (e) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees
      shall be chosen.
      (3) Every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft
development plan,—
             (a) have regard to—
                 (i) the plans prepared by the Municipalities and the
            Panchayats in the Metropolitan area;
                   (ii) matters of common interest between the Municipalities
            and the Panchayats, including coordinated spatial planning of the
            area, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources,
            the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental
            conservation;
                 (iii) the overall objectives and priorities set by the
            Government of India and the Government of the State;
                   (iv) the extent and nature of investments likely to be made
            in the Metropolitan area by agencies of the Government of India
            and of the Government of the State and other available resources
            whether financial or otherwise;
            (b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor
      may, by order, specify.
      (4) The Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall
forward the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the
Government of the State.
136                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
      243ZF. Continuance of existing laws and Municipalities.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of any law relating to
Municipalities in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, which is inconsistent
with the provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or
repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the
expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier:
       Provided that all the Municipalities existing immediately before such
commencement shall continue till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner
dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of
that State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House
of the Legislature of that State.
     243ZG. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
             (a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of
      constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or
      purporting to be made under article 243ZA shall not be called in
      question in any court;
             (b) no election to any Municipality shall be called in question
      except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such
      manner as is provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature
      of a State.]
                                    [PART IXB
                       THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES
       243ZH. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
           (a) “authorised person” means a person referred to as such in article
       243ZQ;
           (b) “board” means the board of directors or the governing body of a
       co-operative society, by whatever name called, to which the direction
       and control of the management of the affairs of a society is entrusted to;
           (c) “co-operative society” means a society registered or deemed to be
       registered under any law relating to co-operative societies for the time
       being in force in any State;
           (d) “multi-State co-operative society” means a society with objects
       not confined to one State and registered or deemed to be registered under
       any law for the time being in force relating to such co-operatives;
           (e) “office bearer” means a President, Vice-President, Chairperson,
       Vice-Chairperson, Secretary or Treasurer, of a co-operative society and
       includes any other person to be elected by the board of any co-operative
       society;
           (f) “Registrar” means the Central Registrar appointed by the Central
       Government in relation to the multi-State co-operative societies and the
       Registrar for co-operative societies appointed by the State Government
       under the law made by the Legislature of a State in relation to
       co-operative societies;
           (g) “State Act” means any law made by the Legislature of a State;
           (h) “State level co-operative society” means a co-operative society
       having its area of operation extending to the whole of a State and defined
       as such in any law made by the Legislature of a State.
       2 4 3 ZI . Incorporation of co-operative societies.—Subject to the
provisions of this Part, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions
with respect to the incorporation, regulation and winding up of co-operative
societies based on the principles of voluntary formation, democratic
member-control, member-economic participation and autonomous functioning.
138                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
      243ZJ. Number and term of members of board and its office
bearers.—(1) The board shall consist of such number of directors as may be
provided by the Legislature of a State, by law:
       Provided that the maximum number of directors of a co-operative
society shall not exceed twenty-one:
       Provided further that the Legislature of a State shall, by law, provide for
the reservation of one seat for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes
and two seats for women on board of every co-operative society consisting of
individuals as members and having members from such class of category of
persons.
      (2) The term of office of elected members of the board and its office
bearers shall be five years from the date of election and the term of office
bearers shall be conterminous with the term of the board:
       Provided that the board may fill a casual vacancy on the board by
nomination out of the same class of members in respect of which the casual
vacancy has arisen, if the term of office of the board is less than half of its
original term.
       (3) The Legislature of a State shall, by law, make provisions for
co-option of persons to be members of the board having experience in the field
of banking, management, finance or specialisation in any other field relating to
the objects and activities undertaken by the co-operative society, as members of
the board of such society:
       Provided that the number of such co-opted members shall not exceed
two in addition to twenty-one directors specified in the first proviso to
clause (1):
      Provided further that such co-opted members shall not have the right to
vote in any election of the co-operative society in their capacity as such
member or to be eligible to be elected as office bearers of the board:
       Provided also that the functional directors of a co-operative society shall
also be the members of the board and such members shall be excluded for the
purpose of counting the total number of directors specified in the first proviso
to clause (1).
139                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       243ZK. Election of members of board.—(1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in any law made by the Legislature of a State, the election of a board
shall be conducted before the expiry of the term of the board so as to ensure
that the newly elected members of the board assume office immediately on the
expiry of the office of members of the outgoing board.
       (2) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of
electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to a co-operative society
shall vest in such an authority or body, as may be provided by the Legislature
of a State, by law:
       Provided that the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the
procedure and guidelines for the conduct of such elections.
      243ZL. Supersession and suspension of board and interim
management.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the
time being in force, no board shall be superseded or kept under suspension for a
period exceeding six months:
     Provided that the board may be superseded or kept under suspension in a
case—
            (i) of its persistent default; or
            (ii) of negligence in the performance of its duties; or
           (iii) the board has committed any act prejudicial to the interests of
       the co-operative society or its members; or
            (iv) there is stalemate in the constitution or functions of the board;
       or
           (v) the authority or body as provided by the Legislature of a State,
       by law, under clause (2) of article 243ZK, has failed to conduct
       elections in accordance with the provisions of the State Act:
       Provided further that the board of any such co-operative society shall not
be superseded or kept under suspension where there is no Government
shareholding or loan or financial assistance or any guarantee by the
Government:
       Provided also that in case of a co-operative society carrying on the
business of banking, the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949
(10 of 1949) shall also apply:
140                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       Provided also that in case of a co-operative society, other than a
multi-State co-operative society, carrying on the business of banking, the
provisions of this clause shall have the effect as if for the words “six months”,
the words “one year” had been substituted.
       (2) In case of supersession of a board, the administrator appointed to
manage the affairs of such co-operative society shall arrange for conduct of
elections within the period specified in clause (1) and handover the
management to the elected board.
       (3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions for the
conditions of service of the administrator.
       243ZM. Audit of accounts of co-operative societies.—(1) The
Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the
maintenance of accounts by the co-operative societies and the auditing of such
accounts at least once in each financial year.
       (2) The Legislature of a State shall, by law, lay down the minimum
qualifications and experience of auditors and auditing firms that shall be
eligible for auditing accounts of the co-operative societies.
       (3) Every co-operative society shall cause to be audited by an auditor or
auditing firms referred to in clause (2) appointed by the general body of the
co-operative society:
       Provided that such auditors or auditing firms shall be appointed from a
panel approved by a State Government or an authority authorised by the State
Government in this behalf.
       (4) The accounts of every co-operative society shall be audited within
six months of the close of the financial year to which such accounts relate.
       (5) The audit report of the accounts of an apex co-operative society, as
may be defined by the State Act, shall be laid before the State Legislature in the
manner, as may be provided by the State Legislature, by law.
       243ZN. Convening of general body meetings.—The Legislature of a
State may, by law, make provisions that the annual general body meeting of
every co-operative society shall be convened within a period of six months of
close of the financial year to transact the business as may be provided in such
law.
141                 THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
        243ZO. Right of a member to get information.—(1) The Legislature
of a State may, by law, provide for access to every member of a co-operative
society to the books, information and accounts of the co-operative society kept
in regular transaction of its business with such member.
        (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions to ensure
the participation of members in the management of the co-operative society
providing minimum requirement of attending meetings by the members and
utilising the minimum level of services as may be provided in such law.
        (3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for co-operative
education and training for its members.
       243ZP. Returns.—Every co-operative society shall file returns, within
six months of the close of every financial year, to the authority designated by
the State Government including the following matters, namely:—
         (a) annual report of its activities;
         (b) its audited statement of accounts;
         (c) plan for surplus disposal as approved by the general body of the
      co-operative society;
         (d) list of amendments to the bye-laws of the co-operative society, if
      any;
         (e) declaration regarding date of holding of its general body meeting
      and conduct of elections when due; and
         (f) any other information required by the Registrar in pursuance of
      any of the provisions of the State Act.
      243ZQ. Offences and penalties.—(1) The Legislature of a State may,
by law, make provisions for the offences relating to the co-operative societies
and penalties for such offences.
      (2) A law made by the Legislature of a State under clause (1) shall
include the commission of the following act or omission as offences, namely:—
         (a) a co-operative society or an officer or member thereof wilfully
      makes a false return or furnishes false information, or any person
      wilfully not furnishes any information required from him by a person
      authorised in this behalf under the provisions of the State Act;
142                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
         (b) any person wilfully or without any reasonable excuse disobeys
      any summons, requisition or lawful written order issued under the
      provisions of the State Act;
         (c) any employer who, without sufficient cause, fails to pay to a
      co-operative society amount deducted by him from its employee within a
      period of fourteen days from the date on which such deduction is made;
         (d) any officer or custodian who wilfully fails to handover custody of
      books, accounts, documents, records, cash, security and other property
      belonging to a co-operative society of which he is an officer or
      custodian, to an authorised person; and
         (e) whoever, before, during or after the election of members of the
      board or office bearers, adopts any corrupt practice.
        243ZR. Application to multi-State co-operative societies.—The
provisions of this Part shall apply to the multi-State co-operative societies
subject to the modification that any reference to “Legislature of a State”, “State
Act” or “State Government” shall be construed as a reference to “Parliament”,
“Central Act” or “the Central Government” respectively.
        243ZS. Application to Union territories.—The provisions of this Part
shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union
territory, having no Legislative Assembly as if the references to the Legislature
of a State were a reference to the administrator thereof appointed under
article 239 and, in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly,
to that Legislative Assembly:
        Provided that the President may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
direct that the provisions of this Part shall not apply to any Union territory or
part thereof as he may specify in the notification.
        243ZT. Continuance of existing laws.— Notwithstanding anything in
this Part, any provision of any law relating to co-operative societies in force in
a State immediately before the commencement of the Constitution
(Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011, which is inconsistent with the
provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the expiration
of one year from such commencement, whichever is less.]
                THE SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL ARE AS