203. Procedure in Legislature with respect to estimates.—(1) So
much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated
Fund of a State shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legislative Assembly,
93                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
but nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the discussion in the
Legislature of any of those estimates.
        (2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be
submitted in the form of demands for grants to the Legislative Assembly, and
the Legislative Assembly shall have power to assent, or to refuse to assent, to
any demand, or to assent to any demand subject to a reduction of the amount
specified therein.
        (3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation
of the Governor.

204. Appropriation Bills.—(1) As soon as may be after the grants under
article 203 have been made by the Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to
provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of the State of all
moneys required to meet—
            (a) the grants so made by the Assembly; and
          (b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State but
      not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously
      laid before the House or Houses.
       (2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the House or
either House of the Legislature of the State which will have the effect of
varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so made or of
varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of
the State, and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment
is inadmissible under this clause shall be final.
      (3) Subject to the provisions of articles 205 and 206, no money shall be
withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the State except under appropriation
made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of this article.

205. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.—(1) The Governor
shall—
         (a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the
      provisions of article 204 to be expended for a particular service for the
      current financial year is found to be insufficient for the purposes of that
      year or when a need has arisen during the current financial year for
      supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new service not
      contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year; or
94                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
         (b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial
      year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year,
cause to be laid before the House or the Houses of the Legislature of the State
another statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to
be presented to the Legislative Assembly of the State a demand for such excess,
as the case may be.
       (2) The provisions of articles 202, 203 and 204 shall have effect in
relation to any such statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law
to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of the State to meet such expenditure or the grant in respect of such
demand as they have effect in relation to the annual financial statement and the
expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant and the law to be
made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated
Fund of the State to meet such expenditure or grant.

206. Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the
Legislative Assembly of a State shall have power—
          (a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated
      expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of
      the procedure prescribed in article 203 for the voting of such grant and
      the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 204 in
      relation to that expenditure;
         (b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the
      resources of the State when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite
      character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details
      ordinarily given in an annual financial statement;
         (c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current
      service of any financial year,
and the Legislature of the State shall have power to authorise by law the
withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of the State for the purposes
for which the said grants are made.
       (2) The provisions of articles 203 and 204 shall have effect in relation to
the making of any grant under clause (1) and to any law to be made under that
clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any
expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made
95                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund
of the State to meet such expenditure.

207. Special provisions as to financial Bills.—(1) A Bill or amendment
making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of
clause (1) of article 199 shall not be introduced or moved except on the
recommendation of the Governor, and a Bill making such provision shall not be
introduced in a Legislative Council:
       Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for
the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of
any tax.
       (2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any
of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of
fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for
licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the
imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local
authority or body for local purposes.
       (3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be passed by a
House of the Legislature of the State unless the Governor has recommended to
that House the consideration of the Bill.
                                Procedure Generally

208. Rules of procedure.—(1) A House of the Legislature of a State
may make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, its
procedure and the conduct of its business.
       (2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of procedure and
standing orders in force immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution with respect to the Legislature for the corresponding Province shall
have effect in relation to the Legislature of the State subject to such modifications
and adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly, or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case may be.
       (3) In a State having a Legislative Council the Governor, after
consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the Chairman of
96                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
the Legislative Council, may make rules as to the procedure with respect to
communications between the two Houses.

209. Regulation by law of procedure in the Legislature of the State in
relation to financial business.—The Legislature of a State may, for the purpose
of the timely completion of financial business, regulate by law the procedure of,
and the conduct of business in, the House or Houses of the Legislature of the
State in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of
moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the State, and, if and so far as any
provision of any law so made is inconsistent with any rule made by the House or
either House of the Legislature of the State under clause (1) of article 208 or with
any rule or standing order having effect in relation to the Legislature of the State
under clause (2) of that article, such provision shall prevail.

210. Language to be used in the Legislature.—(1) Notwithstanding
anything in Part XVII, but subject to the provisions of article 348, business in
the Legislature of a State shall be transacted in the official language or
languages of the State or in Hindi or in English:
       Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or Chairman of
the Legislative Council, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may
permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in any of the
languages aforesaid to address the House in his mother-tongue.
       (2) Unless the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, this
article shall, after the expiration of a period of fifteen years from the
commencement of this Constitution, have effect as if the words “or in English”
were omitted therefrom:
         [Provided that in relation to the 2[Legislatures of the States of Himachal
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura] this clause shall have effect as if for
the words “fifteen years” occurring therein, the words “twenty-five years” were
substituted:]
         [Provided further that in relation to the 4[Legislatures of the States of
  [Arunachal Pradesh, Goa and Mizoram]], this clause shall have effect as if for
97                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
the words "fifteen years" occurring therein, the words "forty years" were
substituted.]

211. Restriction on discussion in the Legislature.—No discussion
shall take place in the Legislature of a State with respect to the conduct of any
Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties.

212. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of the Legislature.—(1)
The validity of any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall not be called
in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.
       (2) No officer or member of the Legislature of a State in whom powers
are vested by or under this Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct
of business, or for maintaining order, in the Legislature shall be subject to the
jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.
             CHAPTER IV.—LEGISLATIVE POWER OF THE GOVERNOR

213. Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of
Legislature.—(1) If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly of a
State is in session, or where there is a Legislative Council in a State, except
when both Houses of the Legislature are in session, the Governor is satisfied
that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate
action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to
him to require:
       Provided that the Governor shall not, without instructions from the
President, promulgate any such Ordinance if—
              (a) a Bill containing the same provisions would under this
       Constitution have required the previous sanction of the President for the
       introduction thereof into the Legislature; or
              (b) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill containing
       the same provisions for the consideration of the President; or
              (c) an Act of the Legislature of the State containing the same
       provisions would under this Constitution have been invalid unless,
       having been reserved for the consideration of the President, it had
       received the assent of the President.
       (2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same
force and effect as an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the
Governor, but every such Ordinance—
98                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
               (a) shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State, or
        where there is a Legislative Council in the State, before both the Houses,
        and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the
        reassembly of the Legislature, or if before the expiration of that period a
        resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislative Assembly and
        agreed to by the Legislative Council, if any, upon the passing of the
        resolution or, as the case may be, on the resolution being agreed to by
        the Council; and
               (b) may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor.
        Explanation.—Where the Houses of the Legislature of a State having a
Legislative Council are summoned to reassemble on different dates, the period
of six weeks shall be reckoned from the later of those dates for the purposes of
this clause.
        (3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision
which would not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of the State
assented to by the Governor, it shall be void:
        Provided that, for the purposes of the provisions of this Constitution
relating to the effect of an Act of the Legislature of a State which is repugnant
to an Act of Parliament or an existing law with respect to a matter enumerated
in the Concurrent List, an Ordinance promulgated under this article in
pursuance of instructions from the President shall be deemed to be an Act of
the Legislature of the State which has been reserved for the consideration of the
President and assented to by him.
          (4)*                 *                *                  *
99                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
                 CHAPTER V.—THE HIGH COURTS IN THE STATES

214. High Courts for States.—1*** There shall be a High Court for each
State.
        (2)*                  *                   *              *
        (3)*                  *                   *              *

215. High Courts to be courts of record.—Every High Court shall be a
court of record and shall have all the powers of such a court including the
power to punish for contempt of itself.

216. Constitution of High Courts.—Every High Court shall consist of a
Chief Justice and such other Judges as the President may from time to time
deem it necessary to appoint.
         *                *                *                 *             *

217. Appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High
Court.—(1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President
by warrant under his hand and seal 4[on the recommendation of the National
Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in article 124A], and the
Governor of the State, and, in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the
Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court, 5[shall hold office, in the
case of an additional or acting Judge, as provided in article 224, and in any
other case, until he attains the age of 6[sixty-two years:]]
       Provided that—
           (a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
       President, resign his office;
           (b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the
100                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
      manner provided in clause (4) of article 124 for the removal of a Judge
      of the Supreme Court;
          (c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appointed by
      the President to be a Judge of the Supreme Court or by his being
      transferred by the President to any other High Court within the territory
      of India.
      (2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High
Court unless he is a citizen of India and—
               (a) has for at least ten years held a judicial office in the territory of
      India; or
               (b) has for at least ten years been an advocate of a High Court
        *** or of two or more such Courts in succession.2***
                 (c)*            *               *                 *                 *
      Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause—
                 [(a) in computing the period during which a person has held
      judicial office in the territory of India, there shall be included any period,
      after he has held any judicial office, during which the person has been an
      advocate of a High Court or has held the office of a member of a tribunal
      or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of
      law;]
            [(aa)] in computing the period during which a person has been an
      advocate of a High Court, there shall be included any period during
      which the person 5[has held judicial office or the office of a member of a
      tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special
      knowledge of law] after he became an advocate;
          (b) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial
      office in the territory of India or been an advocate of a High Court, there
      shall be included any period before the commencement of this
101                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       Constitution during which he has held judicial office in any area which
       was comprised before the fifteenth day of August, 1947, within India as
       defined by the Government of India Act, 1935, or has been an advocate
       of any High Court in any such area, as the case may be.
         [(3) If any question arises as to the age of a Judge of a High Court, the
question shall be decided by the President after consultation with the Chief
Justice of India and the decision of the President shall be final.]

218. Application of certain provisions relating to Supreme Court to
High Courts.—The provisions of clauses (4) and (5) of article 124 shall apply
in relation to a High Court as they apply in relation to the Supreme Court with
the substitution of references to the High Court for references to the Supreme
Court.

219. Oath or affirmation by Judges of High Courts.—Every person
appointed to be a Judge of a High Court 2*** shall, before he enters upon his
office, make and subscribe before the Governor of the State, or some person
appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form
set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.

[220. Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge.—No
person who, after the commencement of this Constitution, has held office as a
permanent Judge of a High Court shall plead or act in any court or before any
authority in India except the Supreme Court and the other High Courts.
       Explanation.—In this article, the expression “High Court” does not
include a High Court for a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule as it
existed before the commencement4 of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956.]

221. Salaries, etc., of Judges.—5[(1) There shall be paid to the Judges
of each High Court such salaries as may be determined by Parliament by law
102                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries as are specified in
the Second Schedule.]
       (2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such allowances and to such rights in
respect of leave of absence and pension as may from time to time be
determined by or under law made by Parliament and, until so determined, to
such allowances and rights as are specified in the Second Schedule:
       Provided that neither the allowances of a Judge nor his rights in respect
to leave of absence or pension shall be varied to his disadvantage after his
appointment.

222. Transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another.—(1) The
President may, 1[on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments
Commission referred to in article 124A], transfer a Judge from one High Court
to any other High Court 2***.
         [(2) When a Judge has been or is so transferred, he shall, during the
period he serves, after the commencement of the Constitution (Fifteenth
Amendment) Act, 1963, as a Judge of the other High Court, be entitled to
receive in addition to his salary such compensatory allowance as may be
determined by Parliament by law and, until so determined, such compensatory
allowance as the President may by order fix.]

223. Appointment of acting Chief Justice.—When the office of Chief
Justice of a High Court is vacant or when any such Chief Justice is, by reason
of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of
the office shall be performed by such one of the other Judges of the Court as
the President may appoint for the purpose.

[224. Appointment of additional and acting Judges.—(1) If by
reason of any temporary increase in the business of a High Court or by reason
103                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
of arrears of work therein, it appears to the President that the number of the
Judges of that Court should be for the time being increased, 1[the President
may, in consultation with the National Judicial Appointments Commission,
appoint] duly qualified persons to be additional Judges of the Court for such
period not exceeding two years as he may specify.
        (2) When any Judge of a High Court other than the Chief Justice is by
reason of absence or for any other reason unable to perform the duties of his
office or is appointed to act temporarily as Chief Justice, 1[the President may,
in consultation with the National Judicial Appointments Commission, appoint]
a duly qualified person to act as a Judge of that Court until the permanent Judge
has resumed his duties.
        (3) No person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High
Court shall hold office after attaining the age of 2[sixty-two years].]

[224A. Appointment of retired Judges at sittings of High Courts.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, 4[the National Judicial Appointments
Commission on a reference made to it by the Chief Justice of a High Court for
any State, may with the previous consent of the President], request any person
who has held the office of a Judge of that Court or of any other High Court to
sit and act as a Judge of the High Court for that State, and every such person so
requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowances as
the President may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and
privileges of, but shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that High
Court:
       Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require any such
person as aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge of that High Court unless he
consents so to do.]
104                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

225. Jurisdiction of existing High Courts.—Subject to the provisions
of this Constitution and to the provisions of any law of the appropriate
Legislature made by virtue of powers conferred on that Legislature by this
Constitution, the jurisdiction of, and the law administered in, any existing High
Court, and the respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the
administration of justice in the Court, including any power to make rules of
Court and to regulate the sittings of the Court and of members thereof sitting
alone or in Division Courts, shall be the same as immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution:
          [Provided that any restriction to which the exercise of original
jurisdiction by any of the High Courts with respect to any matter concerning
the revenue or concerning any act ordered or done in the collection thereof was
subject immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall no
longer apply to the exercise of such jurisdiction.]

[226. Power of High Courts to issue certain writs.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything in article 32 3***, every High Court shall have
power, throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to
issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate cases, any
Government, within those territories directions, orders or writs, including
  [writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto
and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights
conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.]
        (2) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue directions, orders or writs
to any Government, authority or person may also be exercised by any High
Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the territories within which the cause
of action, wholly or in part, arises for the exercise of such power,
105                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
notwithstanding that the seat of such Government or authority or the residence
of such person is not within those territories.
          [(3) Where any party against whom an interim order, whether by way of
injunction or stay or in any other manner, is made on, or in any proceedings
relating to, a petition under clause (1), without—
             (a) furnishing to such party copies of such petition and all documents
        in support of the plea for such interim order; and
             (b) giving such party an opportunity of being heard,
makes an application to the High Court for the vacation of such order and
furnishes a copy of such application to the party in whose favour such order has
been made or the counsel of such party, the High Court shall dispose of the
application within a period of two weeks from the date on which it is received or
from the date on which the copy of such application is so furnished, whichever is
later, or where the High Court is closed on the last day of that period, before the
expiry of the next day afterwards on which the High Court is open; and if the
application is not so disposed of, the interim order shall, on the expiry of that
period, or, as the case may be, the expiry of the said next day, stand vacated.]
        [(4) The power conferred on a High Court by this article shall not be in
derogation of the power conferred on the Supreme Court by clause (2) of article 32.]

[226A. Constitutional validity of Central laws not to be considered in
proceedings under article 226.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third
Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 8 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).

227. Power of superintendence over all courts by the High Court.—
 [(1) Every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts and tribunals
throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction.]
106                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
        (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the
High Court may—
             (a) call for returns from such courts;
             (b) make and issue general rules and prescribe forms for regulating
        the practice and proceedings of such courts; and
             (c) prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept
        by the officers of any such courts.
        (3) The High Court may also settle tables of fees to be allowed to the
sheriff and all clerks and officers of such courts and to attorneys, advocates and
pleaders practising therein:
        Provided that any rules made, forms prescribed or tables settled under
clause (2) or clause (3) shall not be inconsistent with the provision of any law
for the time being in force, and shall require the previous approval of the
Governor.
        (4) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to confer on a High Court
powers of superintendence over any court or tribunal constituted by or under
any law relating to the Armed Forces.
          (5)*                    *                    *               *