335. Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to services
and posts.—The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the
maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments to
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State:
194                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
          [Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent in making of any
provision in favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes for relaxation in qualifying marks in any examination or lowering the
standards of evaluation, for reservation in matters or promotion to any class or
classes of services or posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State.]

336. Special provision for Anglo-Indian community in certain
services.—(1) During the first two years after the commencement of this
Constitution, appointments of members of the Anglo-Indian community to posts
in the railway, customs, postal and telegraph services of the Union shall be made
on the same basis as immediately before the fifteenth day of August, 1947.
        During every succeeding period of two years, the number of posts
reserved for the members of the said community in the said services shall, as
nearly as possible, be less by ten per cent. than the numbers so reserved during
the immediately preceding period of two years:
       Provided that at the end of ten years from the commencement of this
Constitution all such reservations shall cease.
       (2) Nothing in clause (1) shall bar the appointment of members of the
Anglo-Indian community to posts other than, or in addition to, those reserved
for the community under that clause if such members are found qualified for
appointment on merit as compared with the members of other communities.

337. Special provision with respect to educational grants for the
benefit of Anglo-Indian community.—During the first three financial years
after the commencement of this Constitution, the same grants, if any, shall be
made by the Union and by each State 2*** for the benefit of the Anglo-Indian
community in respect of education as were made in the financial year ending
on the thirty-first day of March, 1948.
       During every succeeding period of three years the grants may be less by
ten per cent. than those for the immediately preceding period of three years:
       Provided that at the end of ten years from the commencement of this
Constitution such grants, to the extent to which they are a special concession to
the Anglo-Indian community, shall cease:
       Provided further that no educational institution shall be entitled to
receive any grant under this article unless at least forty per cent. of the annual
admissions therein are made available to members of communities other than
the Anglo-Indian community.
195                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

338. 1[National Commission for Scheduled Castes].—2[3[(1) There
shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Castes to be known as the National
Commission for the Scheduled Castes.
       (2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of
the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be
such as the President may by rule determine.]
    (3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
       (4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
       (5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
             (a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards
       provided for the Scheduled Castes 4*** under this Constitution or under
       any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the
       Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;
             (b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the
       deprivation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Castes 4***;
              (c) to participate and advise on the planning process of
       socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes 1*** and to
       evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any
       State;
             (d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the
       Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
             (e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that
       should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of
196                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
      those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and
      socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes 1***; and
              (f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare
      and development and advancement of the Scheduled Castes 1*** as the President
      may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
      (6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each
House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
      (7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with
which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be
forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the
Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken
or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
       (8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in
sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of
clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in
respect of the following matters, namely:—
              (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from
       any part of India and examining him on oath;
              (b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
              (c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
              (d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any
       court or office;
              (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
       documents;
              (f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
      (9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the
Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Castes 1***].
        [(10)] In this article, references to the Scheduled Castes 1*** shall be
construed as including references 3*** to the Anglo-Indian community.

[338A. National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.—(1) There shall
be a Commission for the Scheduled Tribes to be known as the National
Commission for the Scheduled Tribes.
197                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
      (2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of
the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be
such as the President may by rule determine.
      (3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
      (4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
      (5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
              (a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the
      safeguards provided for the Scheduled Tribes under this Constitution or
      under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the
      Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;
              (b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the
      deprivation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Tribes;
              (c) to participate and advise on the planning process of
      socio-economic development of the Scheduled Tribes and to evaluate the
      progress of their development under the Union and any State;
              (d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as
      the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those
      safeguards;
              (e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the
      measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the
      effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures
      for the protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the
      Scheduled Tribes; and
              (f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection,
      welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes as
      the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by
      Parliament, by rule specify.
      (6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each
House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such recommendations.
      (7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter
with which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be
forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the
Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken
or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
198                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
      (8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in
sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of
clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in
respect of the following matters, namely:—
              (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from
      any part of India and examining him on oath;
              (b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
              (c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
              (d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any
      court or office;
              (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents;
              (f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
      (9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the
Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Tribes.]

[338B. National Commission for Backward Classes.—(1) There shall
be a Commission for the socially and educationally backward classes to be
known as the National Commission for Backward Classes.
      (2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson
and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of
the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be
such as the President may by rule determine.
      (3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the
Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and
seal.
      (4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
      (5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
              (a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards
      provided for the socially and educationally backward classes under this
      Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or under
      any order of the Government and to evaluate the working of such
      safeguards;
              (b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the
      deprivation of rights and safeguards of the socially and educationally
      backward classes;
              (c) to participate and advise on the socio-economic development
      of the socially and educationally backward classes and to evaluate the
      progress of their development under the Union and any State;
199                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
              (d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as
      the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those
      safeguards;
              (e) to make in such reports the recommendations as to the
      measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective
      implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the
      protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the socially and
      educationally backward classes; and
              (f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection,
      welfare and development and advancement of the socially and
      educationally backward classes as the President may, subject to the
      provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
      (6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each
House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such recommendations.
      (7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with
which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be
forwarded to the State Government which shall cause it to be laid before the
Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken
or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
      (8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in
sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of
clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in
respect of the following matters, namely :—
              (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from
      any part of India and examining him on oath;
              (b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
              (c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
              (d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any
      court or office;
              (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
      documents;
              (f) any other matter which the President may by rule, determine.
      (9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the
Commission on all major policy matters affecting the socially and
educationally backward classes:]
200                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
         [Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply for the purposes of
clause (3) of article 342A.]

339. Control of the Union over the administration of Scheduled
Areas and the welfare of Scheduled Tribes.—(1) The President may at any
time and shall, at the expiration of ten years from the commencement of this
Constitution by order appoint a Commission to report on the administration of
the Scheduled Areas and the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the States 2***.
       The order may define the composition, powers and procedure of the
Commission and may contain such incidental or ancillary provisions as the
President may consider necessary or desirable.
       (2) The executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of
directions to 3[a State] as to the drawing up and execution of schemes specified
in the direction to be essential for the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the
State.

340. Appointment of a Commission to investigate the conditions of
backward classes.—(1) The President may by order appoint a Commission
consisting of such persons as he thinks fit to investigate the conditions of
socially and educationally backward classes within the territory of India and the
difficulties under which they labour and to make recommendations as to the
steps that should be taken by the Union or any State to remove such difficulties
and to improve their condition and as to the grants that should be made for the
purpose by the Union or any State and the conditions subject to which such
grants should be made, and the order appointing such Commission shall define
the procedure to be followed by the Commission.
       (2) A Commission so appointed shall investigate the matters referred to
them and present to the President a report setting out the facts as found by them
and making such recommendations as they think proper.
       (3) The President shall cause a copy of the report so presented together
with a memorandum explaining the action taken thereon to be laid before each
House of Parliament.

341. Scheduled Castes.—(1) The President 4[may with respect to any
State 5[or Union territory], and where it is a State 2***, after consultation with
201                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
the Governor 1*** thereof], by public notification2, specify the castes, races or
tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the
purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to
that State 3[or Union territory, as the case may be.]
       (2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of
Scheduled Castes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any caste,
race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as
aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any
subsequent notification.

342. Scheduled Tribes.—(1) The President 4[may with respect to any
State 3[or Union territory], and where it is a State 45***, after consultation with
the Governor 31*** thereof], by public notification6,5 specify the tribes or tribal
communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which
shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in
relation to that State 3[or Union territory, as the case may be.]
       (2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of
Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any tribe or
tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal community, but
save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied
by any subsequent notification.
202                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

[342A. Socially and educationally backward classes.—(1) The
President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is a
State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification,
specify 2[the socially and educationally backward classes in the Central List
which shall for the purposes of the Central Government] be deemed to be
socially and educationally backward classes in relation to that State or Union
territory, as the case may be.
        (2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the Central List of
socially and educationally backward classes specified in a notification issued
under clause (1) any socially and educationally backward class, but save as
aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any
subsequent notification.]
          [Explanation.—For the purposes of clauses (1) and (2), the expression
“Central List” means the list of socially and educationally backward classes
prepared and maintained by and for the Central Government.
       (3) Notwithstanding any contained in clauses (1) and (2), every State or
Union territory may, by law, prepare and maintain, for its own purposes, a list
of socially and educationally backward classes, entries in which may be
different from the Central List.]
                              OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
                       CHAPTER I.—LANGUAGE OF THE UNION

343. Official language of the Union.—(1) The official language of the
Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script.
       The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union
shall be the international form of Indian numerals.
       (2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), for a period of fifteen years
from the commencement of this Constitution, the English language shall
continue to be used for all the official purposes of the Union for which it was
being used immediately before such commencement:
       Provided that the President may, during the said period, by order1
authorise the use of the Hindi language in addition to the English language and
of the Devanagari form of numerals in addition to the international form of
Indian numerals for any of the official purposes of the Union.
       (3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, Parliament may by law
provide for the use, after the said period of fifteen years, of—
           (a) the English language; or
           (b) the Devanagari form of numerals,
 for such purposes as may be specified in the law.

344. Commission and Committee of Parliament on official
language.—(1) The President shall, at the expiration of five years from the
commencement of this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of ten years
from such commencement, by order constitute a Commission which shall
consist of a Chairman and such other members representing the different
languages specified in the Eighth Schedule as the President may appoint, and
the order shall define the procedure to be followed by the Commission.
       (2) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to
the President as to—
               (a) the progressive use of the Hindi language for the official
       purposes of the Union;
               (b) restrictions on the use of the English language for all or any of
       the official purposes of the Union;
               (c) the language to be used for all or any of the purposes
       mentioned in article 348;
204                 THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
              (d) the form of numerals to be used for any one or more specified
       purposes of the Union;
              (e) any other matter referred to the Commission by the President
       as regards the official language of the Union and the language for
       communication between the Union and a State or between one State and
       another and their use.
       (3) In making their recommendations under clause (2), the Commission
shall have due regard to the industrial, cultural and scientific advancement of
India, and the just claims and the interests of persons belonging to the
non-Hindi speaking areas in regard to the public services.
       (4) There shall be constituted a Committee consisting of thirty members,
of whom twenty shall be members of the House of the People and ten shall be
members of the Council of States to be elected respectively by the members of
the House of the People and the members of the Council of States in
accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the
single transferable vote.
       (5) It shall be the duty of the Committee to examine the
recommendations of the Commission constituted under clause (1) and to report
to the President their opinion thereon.
       (6) Notwithstanding anything in article 343, the President may, after
consideration of the report referred to in clause (5), issue directions in
accordance with the whole or any part of that report.
                      CHAPTER II.—REGIONAL LANGUAGES

345. Official language or languages of a State.—Subject to the
provisions of articles 346 and 347, the Legislature of a State may by law adopt
any one or more of the languages in use in the State or Hindi as the language or
languages to be used for all or any of the official purposes of that State:
       Provided that, until the Legislature of the State otherwise provides by
law, the English language shall continue to be used for those official purposes
within the State for which it was being used immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution.

346. Official language for communication between one State and
another or between a State and the Union.—The language for the time being
authorised for use in the Union for official purposes shall be the official
language for communication between one State and another State and between
a State and the Union:
205                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       Provided that if two or more States agree that the Hindi language should
be the official language for communication between such States, that language
may be used for such communication.

347. Special provision relating to language spoken by a section of the
population of a State.—On a demand being made in that behalf the President
may, if he is satisfied that a substantial proportion of the population of a State
desire the use of any language spoken by them to be recognised by that State,
direct that such language shall also be officially recognised throughout that
State or any part thereof for such purpose as he may specify.
               CHAPTER III.—LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT,
                                  HIGH COURTS, ETC.

348. Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High
Courts and for Acts, Bills, etc.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the
foregoing provisions of this Part, until Parliament by law otherwise provides—
              (a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court;
              (b) the authoritative texts—
                      (i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be
              moved in either House of Parliament or in the House or either
              House of the Legislature of a State;
                      (ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a
              State and of all Ordinances promulgated by the President or the
              Governor 1*** of a State; and
                      (iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued
              under this Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or
              the Legislature of a State,
       shall be in the English language.
       (2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (1), the
Governor 1*** of a State may, with the previous consent of the President,
authorise the use of the Hindi language, or any other language used for any
official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court having its
principal seat in that State:
206                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
        Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any judgment, decree
or order passed or made by such High Court.
        (3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (b) of clause (1), where the
Legislature of a State has prescribed any language other than the English
language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Legislature of the
State or in Ordinances promulgated by the Governor 1*** of the State or in any
order, rule, regulation or bye-law referred to in paragraph (iii) of that sub-clause,
a translation of the same in the English language published under the authority of
the Governor 1*** of the State in the Official Gazette of that State shall be
deemed to be the authoritative text thereof in the English language under this
article.