177. Rights of Ministers and Advocate-General as respects the
Houses.—Every Minister and the Advocate-General for a State shall have the
right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the
Legislative Assembly of the State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative
Council, both Houses, and to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of, any committee of the Legislature of which he may be named a
member, but shall not, by virtue of this article, be entitled to vote.
                           Officers of the State Legislature

178. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly.—Every Legislative Assembly of a State shall, as soon as may be,
choose two members of the Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy
Speaker thereof and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker
becomes vacant, the Assembly shall choose another member to be Speaker or
Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.

179. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of
Speaker and Deputy Speaker.—A member holding office as Speaker or
Deputy Speaker of an Assembly—
               (a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly;
               (b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such
        member is the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is
        the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and
               (c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the
        Assembly passed by a majority of all the then members of the Assembly:
        Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved
unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the
resolution:
        Provided further that, whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the Speaker
shall not vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of the
Assembly after the dissolution.

180. Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the
duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.—(1) While the office of Speaker
is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or,
if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the Assembly
as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.
        (2) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Assembly
the Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined
by the rules of procedure of the Assembly, or, if no such person is present, such
other person as may be determined by the Assembly, shall act as Speaker.
82                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

181. The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.—(1) At any
sitting of the Legislative Assembly, while any resolution for the removal of the
Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any
resolution for the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under
consideration, the Deputy Speaker, shall not, though he is present, preside, and
the provisions of clause (2) of article 180 shall apply in relation to every such
sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker or, as the
case may be, the Deputy Speaker, is absent.
        (2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take
part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for
his removal from office is under consideration in the Assembly and shall,
notwithstanding anything in article 189, be entitled to vote only in the first
instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but
not in the case of an equality of votes.

182. The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative
Council.—The Legislative Council of every State having such Council shall, as
soon as may be, choose two members of the Council to be respectively
Chairman and Deputy Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of Chairman
or Deputy Chairman becomes vacant, the Council shall choose another member
to be Chairman or Deputy Chairman, as the case may be.

183. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of
Chairman and Deputy Chairman.—A member holding office as Chairman or
Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council—
            (a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Council;
            (b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such
        member is the Chairman, to the Deputy Chairman, and if such member is
        the Deputy Chairman, to the Chairman, resign his office; and
            (c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council
        passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council:
        Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved unless
at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution.

184. Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the
duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.—(1) While the office of
Chairman is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy
Chairman or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also vacant, by such member
of the Council as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.
83                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       (2) During the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the Council
the Deputy Chairman or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined
by the rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such person is present, such
other person as may be determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman.

185. The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.—(1) At any
sitting of the Legislative Council, while any resolution for the removal of the
Chairman from his office is under consideration, the Chairman, or while any
resolution for the removal of the Deputy Chairman from his office is under
consideration, the Deputy Chairman, shall not, though he is present, preside,
and the provisions of clause (2) of article 184 shall apply in relation to every
such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Chairman or, as
the case may be, the Deputy Chairman is absent.
       (2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take
part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Council while any resolution for his
removal from office is under consideration in the Council and shall,
notwithstanding anything in article 189, be entitled to vote only in the first
instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but
not in the case of an equality of votes.

186. Salaries and allowances of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker
and the Chairman and Deputy Chairman.—There shall be paid to the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, and to the
Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council, such salaries
and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislature of the State by
law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances
as are specified in the Second Schedule.

187. Secretariat of State Legislature.—(1) The House or each House
of the Legislature of a State shall have a separate secretarial staff:
       Provided that nothing in this clause shall, in the case of the Legislature
of a State having a Legislative Council, be construed as preventing the creation
of posts common to both Houses of such Legislature.
       (2) The Legislature of a State may by law regulate the recruitment, and
the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of the
House or Houses of the Legislature of the State.
84                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
        (3) Until provision is made by the Legislature of the State under clause (2),
the Governor may, after consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case may be, make rules
regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the
secretarial staff of the Assembly or the Council, and any rules so made shall have
effect subject to the provisions of any law made under the said clause.
                                 Conduct of Business

188. Oath or affirmation by members.—Every member of the
Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State shall, before taking
his seat, make and subscribe before the Governor, or some person appointed in
that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the
purpose in the Third Schedule.

189. Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding
vacancies and quorum.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution,
all questions at any sitting of a House of the Legislature of a State shall be
determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other
than the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such.
        The Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the
first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an
equality of votes.
        (2) A House of the Legislature of a State shall have power to act
notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings
in the Legislature of a State shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered
subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted or
otherwise took part in the proceedings.
          [(3) Until the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, the
quorum to constitute a meeting of a House of the Legislature of a State shall be
ten members or one-tenth of the total number of members of the House,
whichever is greater.
        (4) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly or the
Legislative Council of a State there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the
Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the House or
to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.]
85                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
                          Disqualifications of Members

190. Vacation of seats.—(1) No person shall be a member of both
Houses of the Legislature of a State and provision shall be made by the
Legislature of the State by law for the vacation by a person who is chosen a
member of both Houses of his seat in one house or the other.
       (2) No person shall be a member of the Legislatures of two or more
States specified in the First Schedule and if a person is chosen a member of the
Legislatures of two or more such States, then, at the expiration of such period
as may be specified in rules1 made by the President, that person's seat in the
Legislatures of all such States shall become vacant, unless he has previously
resigned his seat in the Legislatures of all but one of the States.
       (3) If a member of a House of the Legislature of a State—
              (a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in
           [clause (1) or clause (2) of article 191]; or
           [(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the
       speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, and his resignation is
       accepted by the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be,]
his seat shall thereupon become vacant:
        [Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in sub-clause (b),
if from information received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he
thinks fit, the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, is satisfied that such
resignation is not voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such resignation.]
       (4) If for a period of sixty days a member of a House of the Legislature
of a State is without permission of the House absent from all meetings thereof,
the House may declare his seat vacant:
      Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall
be taken of any period during which the House is prorogued or is adjourned for
more than four consecutive days.
86                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

191. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the Legislative
Assembly or Legislative Council of a State—
             [(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or
       the Government of any State specified in the First Schedule, other than
       an office declared by the Legislature of the State by law not to disqualify
       its holder;]
            (b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent
       court;
            (c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
            (d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the
       citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknowledgment of
       allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;
            (e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament.
         [Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause], a person shall not be
deemed to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the
Government of any State specified in the First Schedule by reason only that he
is a Minister either for the Union or for such State.
         [(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of the
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State if he is so disqualified
under the Tenth Schedule.]

[192. Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.—(1)
If any question arises as to whether a member of a House of the Legislature of a
State has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1)
of article 191, the question shall be referred for the decision of the Governor
and his decision shall be final.
87                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
        (2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Governor shall
obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such
opinion.]

193. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation
under article 188 or when not qualified or when disqualified.—If a person
sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative
Council of a State before he has complied with the requirements of article 188,
or when he knows that he is not qualified or that he is disqualified for
membership thereof, or that he is prohibited from so doing by the provisions of
any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of the State, he shall be liable in
respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred
rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the State.
              Powers, Privileges and Immunities of State Legislatures
                                  and their Members

194. Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Legislatures and of the
members and committees thereof.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this
Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of the
Legislature, there shall be freedom of speech in the Legislature of every State.
       (2) No member of the Legislature of a State shall be liable to any
proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in
the Legislature or any committee thereof, and no person shall be so liable in
respect of the publication by or under the authority of a House of such a
Legislature of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.
         [(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of a House
of the Legislature of a State, and of the members and the committees of a
House of such Legislature, shall be such as may from time to time be defined
88                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
by the Legislature by law, and, until so defined, 1[shall be those of that House
and of its members and committees immediately before the coming into force
of section 26 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978].
       (4) The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to
persons who by virtue of this Constitution have the right to speak in, and
otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, a House of the Legislature of a State
or any committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of that Legislature.

195. Salaries and allowances of members.—Members of the
Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council of a State shall be entitled to
receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined,
by the Legislature of the State by law and, until provision in that respect is so
made, salaries and allowances at such rates and upon such conditions as were
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution applicable in the
case of members of the Legislative Assembly of the corresponding Province.
                               Legislative Procedure

196. Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.—(1) Subject
to the provisions of articles 198 and 207 with respect to Money Bills and other
financial Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of the Legislature of a State
which has a Legislative Council.
       (2) Subject to the provisions of articles 197 and 198, a Bill shall not be
deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of a State having
a Legislative Council unless it has been agreed to by both Houses, either
without amendment or with such amendments only as are agreed to by both
Houses.
        (3) A Bill pending in the Legislature of a State shall not lapse by reason
of the prorogation of the House or Houses thereof.
        (4) A Bill pending in the Legislative Council of a State which has not
been passed by the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse on a dissolution of the
Assembly.
        (5) A Bill which is pending in the Legislative Assembly of a State, or
which having been passed by the Legislative Assembly is pending in the
Legislative Council, shall lapse on a dissolution of the Assembly.

197. Restriction on powers of Legislative Council as to Bills other
than Money Bills.—(1) If after a Bill has been passed by the Legislative
Assembly of a State having a Legislative Council and transmitted to the
Legislative Council—
89                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
            (a) the Bill is rejected by the Council; or
            (b) more than three months elapse from the date on which the Bill is
        laid before the Council without the Bill being passed by it; or
            (c) the Bill is passed by the Council with amendments to which the
        Legislative Assembly does not agree;
the Legislative Assembly may, subject to the rules regulating its procedure, pass the
Bill again in the same or in any subsequent session with or without such amendments,
if any, as have been made, suggested or agreed to by the Legislative Council and then
transmit the Bill as so passed to the Legislative Council.
         (2) If after a Bill has been so passed for the second time by the
Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the Legislative Council—
            (a) the Bill is rejected by the Council; or
            (b) more than one month elapses from the date on which the Bill is
        laid before the Council without the Bill being passed by it; or
            (c) the Bill is passed by the Council with amendments to which the
        Legislative Assembly does not agree;
the Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of the
State in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly for the second
time with such amendments, if any, as have been made or suggested by the Legislative
Council and agreed to by the Legislative Assembly.
        (3) Nothing in this article shall apply to a Money Bill.

198. Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.—(1) A Money Bill
shall not be introduced in a Legislative Council.
        (2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a
State having a Legislative Council, it shall be transmitted to the Legislative
Council for its recommendations, and the Legislative Council shall within a
period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the
Legislative Assembly with its recommendations, and the Legislative Assembly
may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the
Legislative Council.
        (3) If the Legislative Assembly accepts any of the recommendations of
the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed
by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council
and accepted by the Legislative Assembly.
        (4) If the Legislative Assembly does not accept any of the
90                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed
to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the
Legislative Assembly without any of the amendments recommended by the
Legislative Council.
       (5) If a Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted
to the Legislative Council for its recommendations is not returned to the
Legislative Assembly within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be
deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period
in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly.

199. Definition of “Money Bills”.—(1) For the purposes of this
Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions
dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:—
            (a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;
            (b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any
      guarantee by the State, or the amendment of the law with respect to any
      financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the State;
            (c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund
      of the State, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys
      from any such Fund;
            (d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of
      the State;
            (e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on
      the Consolidated Fund of the State, or the increasing of the amount of
      any such expenditure;
            (f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of the
      State or the public account of the State or the custody or issue of such
      money; or
            (g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in
      sub-clauses (a) to (f).
       (2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it
provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the
demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or
regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
      (3) If any question arises whether a Bill introduced in the Legislature of
91                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
a State which has a Legislative Council is a Money Bill or not, the decision of
the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of such State thereon shall be final.
       (4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted
to the Legislative Council under article 198, and when it is presented to the
Governor for assent under article 200, the certificate of the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.

200. Assent to Bills.—When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative
Assembly of a State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, has
been passed by both Houses of the Legislature of the State, it shall be presented
to the Governor and the Governor shall declare either that he assents to the Bill
or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the
consideration of the President:
       Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the
presentation to him of the Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill
together with a message requesting that the House or Houses will reconsider
the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the
desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his
message and, when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider
the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the House or Houses
with or without amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the
Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom:
       Provided further that the Governor shall not assent to, but shall reserve
for the consideration of the President, any Bill which in the opinion of the
Governor would, if it became law, so derogate from the powers of the High
Court as to endanger the position which that Court is by this Constitution
designed to fill.

201. Bills reserved for consideration.—When a Bill is reserved by a
Governor for the consideration of the President, the President shall declare
either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom:
       Provided that, where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may
direct the Governor to return the Bill to the House or, as the case may be, the
Houses of the Legislature of the State together with such a message as is
mentioned in the first proviso to article 200 and, when a Bill is so returned, the
House or Houses shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of six months
from the date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the House
92                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
or Houses with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to the
President for his consideration.
                          Procedure in Financial Matters

202. Annual financial statement.—(1) The Governor shall in respect of
every financial year cause to be laid before the House or Houses of the
Legislature of the State a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of
the State for that year, in this Part referred to as the “annual financial
statement”.
      (2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial
statement shall show separately—
          (a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this
      Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the
      State; and
          (b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made
      from the Consolidated Fund of the State,
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
      (3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of each State—
          (a) the emoluments and allowances of the Governor and other
      expenditure relating to his office;
          (b) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy
      Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and, in the case of a State having a
      Legislative Council, also of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of
      the Legislative Council;
          (c) debt charges for which the State is liable including interest,
      sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure
      relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt;
          (d) expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of Judges of
      any High Court;
          (e) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any
      court or arbitral tribunal;
          (f) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution, or by the
      Legislature of the State by law, to be so charged.