62. Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of President
and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy.—(1) An
election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office of
President shall be completed before the expiration of the term.
        (2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of President occurring by
reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon
as possible after, and in no case later than six months from, the date of
occurrence of the vacancy; and the person elected to fill the vacancy shall,
subject to the provisions of article 56, be entitled to hold office for the full term
of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.

63. The Vice-President of India.—There shall be a Vice-President of India.

64. The Vice-President to be ex officio Chairman of the Council of
States.—The Vice-President shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of the
States and shall not hold any other office of profit:
30                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       Provided that during any period when the Vice-President acts as
President or discharges the functions of the President under article 65, he shall
not perform the duties of the office of Chairman of the Council of States and
shall not be entitled to any salary or allowance payable to the Chairman of the
Council of States under article 97.

65. The Vice-President to act as President or to discharge his
functions during casual vacancies in the office, or during the absence,
of President.—(1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office
of the President by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise,
the Vice-President shall act as President until the date on which a new
President elected in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter to fill such
vacancy enters upon his office.
       (2) When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to
absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice-President shall discharge his
functions until the date on which the President resumes his duties.
       (3) The Vice-President shall, during, and in respect of, the period while
he is so acting as, or discharging the functions of, President, have all the
powers and immunities of the President and be entitled to such emoluments,
allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law and,
until provision in that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances and
privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule.

66. Election of Vice-President.—(1) The Vice-President shall be
elected by the 1[members of an electoral college consisting of the members of
both Houses of Parliament] in accordance with the system of proportional
representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such
election shall be by secret ballot.
       (2) The Vice-President shall not be a member of either House of
Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State, and if a member of
either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State be
elected Vice-President, he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that
House on the date on which he enters upon his office as Vice-President.
       (3) No person shall be eligible for election as Vice-President unless he—
           (a) is a citizen of India;
           (b) has completed the age of thirty-five years; and
31                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
           (c) is qualified for election as a member of the Council of States.
       (4) A person shall not be eligible for election as Vice-President if he
holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of
any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of
the said Governments.
       Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be
deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the President or
Vice-President of the Union or the Governor 1*** of any State or is a Minister
either for the Union or for any State.

67. Term of office of Vice-President.—The Vice-President shall hold
office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
       Provided that—
           (a) a Vice-President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
       President, resign his office;
           (b) a Vice-President may be removed from his office by a resolution
       of the Council of States passed by a majority of all the then members of
       the Council and agreed to by the House of the People; but no resolution
       for the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless at least fourteen
       days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution;
            (c) a Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term,
       continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.

68. Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of Vice-
President and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy.—
(1) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office
of Vice-President shall be completed before the expiration of the term.
         (2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice-President
occurring by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise shall be
held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy, and the person
elected to fill the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of article 67, be
entitled to hold office for the full term of five years from the date on which he
enters upon his office.

69. Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President.—Every Vice-
President shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe before the
32                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation in the following form, that is to say—
          "I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and
                        solemnly affirm
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will faithfully
discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.".

70. Discharge of President's functions in other contingencies.—
Parliament may make such provision as it thinks fit for the discharge of the
functions of the President in any contingency not provided for in this Chapter.

[71. Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of a
President or Vice-President.—(1) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in
connection with the election of a President or Vice-President shall be inquired
into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision shall be final.
       (2) If the election of a person as President or Vice-President is declared
void by the Supreme Court, acts done by him in the exercise and performance
of the powers and duties of the office of President or Vice-President, as the
case may be, on or before the date of the decision of the Supreme Court shall
not be invalidated by reason of that declaration.
       (3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may by law
regulate any matter relating to or connected with the election of a President or
Vice-President.
       (4) The election of a person as President or Vice-President shall not be
called in question on the ground of the existence of any vacancy for whatever
reason among the members of the electoral college electing him.]

72. Power of President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit
or commute sentences in certain cases.—(1) The President shall have the
power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to
suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any
offence—
            (a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court
       Martial;
33                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
          (b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence
       against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the
       Union extends;
           (c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
       (2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the power
conferred by law on any officer of the Armed Forces of the Union to suspend,
remit or commute a sentence passed by a Court Martial.
       (3) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of clause (1) shall affect the power to
suspend, remit or commute a sentence of death exercisable by the Governor 1***
of a State under any law for the time being in force.

73. Extent of executive power of the Union.—(1) Subject to the
provisions of this Constitution, the executive power of the Union shall extend—
          (a) to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make
       laws; and
          (b) to the exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are
       exercisable by the Government of India by virtue of any treaty or
       agreement:
       Provided that the executive power referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not,
save as expressly provided in this Constitution or in any law made by Parliament,
extend in any State 2*** to matters with respect to which the Legislature of the
State has also power to make laws.
       (2) Until otherwise provided by Parliament, a State and any officer or
authority of a State may, notwithstanding anything in this article, continue to
exercise in matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws for
that State such executive power or functions as the State or officer or authority
thereof could exercise immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution.
34                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
                              Council of Ministers

74. Council of Ministers to aid and advise President.—1[(1) There shall
be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise
the President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with
such advice:]
         [Provided that the President may require the Council of Ministers to
reconsider such advice, either generally or otherwise, and the President shall act
in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.]
      (2) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by
Ministers to the President shall not be inquired into in any court.

75. Other provisions as to Ministers.—(1) The Prime Minister shall be
appointed by the President and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the
President on the advice of the Prime Minister.
        [(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the
Council of Ministers shall not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of
members of the House of the People.
       (1B) A member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political
party who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of
the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a Minister under
clause (1) for duration of the period commencing from the date of his
disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such member
would expire or where he contests any election to either House of Parliament
before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he is declared elected,
whichever is earlier.]
       (2) The Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
       (3) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House
of the People.
       (4) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the President shall administer
to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the
purpose in the Third Schedule.
35                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       (5) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a
member of either House of Parliament shall at the expiration of that period cease
to be a Minister.
        (6) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as Parliament
may from time to time by law determine and, until Parliament so determines,
shall be as specified in the Second Schedule.
                           The Attorney-General for India

76. Attorney-General for India.—(1) The President shall appoint a
person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court to be
Attorney-General for India.
       (2) It shall be the duty of the Attorney-General to give advice to the
Government of India upon such legal matters, and to perform such other duties
of a legal character, as may from time to time be referred or assigned to him by
the President, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or under this
Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.
       (3) In the performance of his duties the Attorney-General shall have
right of audience in all courts in the territory of India.
       (4) The Attorney-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the
President, and shall receive such remuneration as the President may determine.
                          Conduct of Government Business

77. Conduct of business of the Government of India.—(1) All
executive action of the Government of India shall be expressed to be taken in
the name of the President.
       (2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the
President shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules1 to
be made by the President, and the validity of an order or instrument which is so
authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order
or instrument made or executed by the President.
       (3) The President shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of
the business of the Government of India, and for the allocation among
Ministers of the said business.
         (4) *                 *                    *                       *
36                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

78. Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of information
to the President, etc.—It shall be the duty of the Prime Minister—
           (a) to communicate to the President all decisions of the Council of
       Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and
       proposals for legislation;
           (b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the
       affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation as the President may
       call for; and
           (c) if the President so requires, to submit for the consideration of the
       Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a
       Minister but which has not been considered by the Council.
                             CHAPTER II.—PARLIAMENT
                                       General

79. Constitution of Parliament.—There shall be a Parliament for the
Union which shall consist of the President and two Houses to be known
respectively as the Council of States and the House of the People.

80. Composition of the Council of States.—(1) 1[2*** The Council of
States] shall consist of—
             (a) twelve members to be nominated by the President in accordance
       with the provisions of clause (3); and
             (b) not more than two hundred and thirty-eight representatives of
       the States 3[and of the Union territories].
       (2) The allocation of seats in the Council of States to be filled by
representatives of the States 3[and of the Union territories] shall be in
accordance with the provisions in that behalf contained in the Fourth Schedule.
       (3) The members to be nominated by the President under sub-clause (a)
of clause (1) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical
experience in respect of such matters as the following, namely:—
               Literature, science, art and social service.
37                      THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       (4) The representatives of each State 1*** in the Council of States shall
be elected by the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State in
accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the
single transferable vote.
       (5) The representatives of the 2[Union territories] in the Council of States
shall be chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law prescribe.

[81. Composition of the House of the People.—(1) 4[Subject to the
provisions of article 331 5***], the House of the People shall consist of—
           (a) not more than 6[five hundred and thirty members] chosen by
       direct election from territorial constituencies in the States; and
           (b) not more than 7[twenty members] to represent the Union
       territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.
       (2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),—
           (a) there shall be allotted to each State a number of seats in the House
       of the People in such manner that the ratio between that number and the
       population of the State is, so far as practicable, the same for all States;
       and
           (b) each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such
       manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and
       the number of seats allotted to it is, so far as practicable, the same
       throughout the State:
         [Provided that the provisions of sub-clause (a) of this clause shall not be
applicable for the purpose of allotment of seats in the House of the People to
any State so long as the population of that State does not exceed six millions.]
38                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       (3) In this article, the expression “population” means the population as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published:
        [Provided that the reference in this clause to the last preceding census of
which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for
the first census taken after the year 2[2026] have been published, 3[be
construed,—
          (i) for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and the proviso to
       that clause, as a reference to the 1971 census; and
          (ii) for the purposes of sub-clause (b) of clause (2) as a reference to
       the 4[2001] census.]]

82. Readjustment after each census.—Upon the completion of each
census, the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States and the
division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such
authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine:
        Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the
House of the People until the dissolution of the then existing House:
          [Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date
as the President may, by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect,
any election to the House may be held on the basis of the territorial
constituencies existing before such readjustment:
        Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken
after the year 6[2026] have been published, it shall not be necessary to
  [readjust,—
39                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
            (i) the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States as
        readjusted on the basis of the 1971 census; and
            (ii) the division of each State into territorial constituencies as may be
        readjusted on the basis of the 1[2001] census,
under this article.]]

83. Duration of Houses of Parliament.—(1) The Council of States
shall not be subject to dissolution, but as nearly as possible one-third of the
members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on the expiration of every
second year in accordance with the provisions made in that behalf by
Parliament by law.
        (2) The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for
  [five years] from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the
expiration of the said period of 2[five years] shall operate as a dissolution of
the House:
        Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is
in operation, be extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one
year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after
the Proclamation has ceased to operate.

84. Qualification for membership of Parliament.—A person shall not
be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Parliament unless he—
              [(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some
        person authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or
        affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third
        Schedule;]
            (b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than thirty
        years of age and, in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less
        than twenty-five years of age; and
            (c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that
        behalf by or under any law made by Parliament.
40                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

[85. Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution.—(1) The
President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to meet at
such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between
its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the
next session.
       (2) The President may from time to time—
           (a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
           (b) dissolve the House of the People.]

86. Right of President to address and send messages to Houses.—(1)
The President may address either House of Parliament or both Houses
assembled together, and for that purpose require the attendance of members.
      (2) The President may send messages to either House of Parliament,
whether with respect to a Bill then pending in Parliament or otherwise, and a
House to which any message is so sent shall with all convenient despatch
consider any matter required by the message to be taken into consideration.

87. Special address by the President.—(1) At the commencement of
 [the first session after each general election to the House of the People and at
the commencement of the first session of each year] the President shall address
both Houses of Parliament assembled together and inform Parliament of the
causes of its summons.
       (2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulating the procedure of
either House for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred to
in such address 3***.

88. Rights of Ministers and Attorney-General as respects Houses.—
Every Minister and the Attorney-General of India shall have the right to speak
in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, either House, any joint
sitting of the Houses, and any committee of Parliament of which he may be
named a member, but shall not by virtue of this article be entitled to vote.
41                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
                              Officers of Parliament

89. The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States.—(1)
The Vice- President of India shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of States.
       (2) The Council of States shall, as soon as may be, choose a member of
the Council to be Deputy Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of
Deputy Chairman becomes vacant, the Council shall choose another member to
be Deputy Chairman thereof.

90. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the office of
Deputy Chairman.—A member holding office as Deputy Chairman of the
Council of States—
           (a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Council;
           (b) may at any time, by writing under his hand addressed to the
       Chairman, resign his office; and
           (c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council
       passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council:
       Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved
unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the
resolution.

91. Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the
duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.—(1) While the office of
Chairman is vacant, or during any period when the Vice-President is acting as,
or discharging the functions of, President, the duties of the office shall be
performed by the Deputy Chairman, or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is
also vacant, by such member of the Council of States as the President may
appoint for the purpose.
       (2) During the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the Council of
States the Deputy Chairman, or, if he is also absent, such person as may be
determined by the rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such person is present,
such other person as may be determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman.

92. The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.—(1) At any
sitting of the Council of States, while any resolution for the removal of the
Vice-President from his office is under consideration, the Chairman, or while
any resolution for the removal of the Deputy Chairman from his office is under
consideration, the Deputy Chairman, shall not, though he is present, preside,
and the provisions of clause (2) of article 91 shall apply in relation to every
such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Chairman, or,
as the case may be, the Deputy Chairman, is absent.
42                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       (2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take
part in the proceedings of, the Council of States while any resolution for the
removal of the Vice-President from his office is under consideration in the
Council, but, notwithstanding anything in article 100, shall not be entitled to
vote at all on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings.

93. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.—
The House of the People shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the
House to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as
the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the House shall
choose another member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.

94. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of
Speaker and Deputy Speaker.— A member holding office as Speaker or
Deputy Speaker of the House of the People—
           (a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the House of
       the People;
           (b) may at any time, by writing under his hand addressed, if such
       member is the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is
       the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and
           (c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the House of
       the People passed by a majority of all the then members of the House:
       Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved
unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the
resolution:
      Provided further that, whenever the House of the People is dissolved, the
Speaker shall not vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of
the House of the People after the dissolution.