228. Transfer of certain cases to High Court.—If the High Court is
satisfied that a case pending in a court subordinate to it involves a substantial
question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution the determination of
which is necessary for the disposal of the case, 2[it shall withdraw the case and
  *** may—]
                 (a) either dispose of the case itself, or
                 (b) determine the said question of law and return the case to the
        court from which the case has been so withdrawn together with a copy of
        its judgment on such question, and the said court shall on receipt thereof
        proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with such judgment.
107                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

[228A. Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to
constitutional validity of State laws.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-
third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 10 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).

229. Officers and servants and the expenses of High Courts.—(1)
Appointments of officers and servants of a High Court shall be made by the Chief
Justice of the Court or such other Judge or officer of the Court as he may direct:
        Provided that the Governor of the State 2*** may by rule require that in
such cases as may be specified in the rule no person not already attached to the
Court shall be appointed to any office connected with the Court save after
consultation with the State Public Service Commission.
        (2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the Legislature of the
State, the conditions of service of officers and servants of a High Court shall be
such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice of the Court or by
some other Judge or officer of the Court authorised by the Chief Justice to
make rules for the purpose:
        Provided that the rules made under this clause shall, so far as they relate
to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, require the approval of the Governor
of the State 2***.
        (3) The administrative expenses of a High Court, including all salaries,
allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and servants of
the Court, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State, and any
fees or other moneys taken by the Court shall form part of that Fund.

[230. Extension of jurisdiction of High Courts to Union
territories.—(1) Parliament may by law extend the jurisdiction of a High Court
to, or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory.
        (2) Where the High Court of a State exercises jurisdiction in relation to a
Union territory,—
            (a) nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as empowering the
        Legislature of the State to increase, restrict or abolish that jurisdiction; and
            (b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in relation to
108                       THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts in that territory, be
       construed as a reference to the President.

231. Establishment of a common High Court for two or more
States.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding provisions of
this Chapter, Parliament may by law establish a common High Court for two or
more States or for two or more States and a Union territory.
       (2) In relation to any such High Court,—
                   (a)*     *                   *                 *                  *
              (b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in relation to
       any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts, be construed as a
       reference to the Governor of the State in which the subordinate courts
       are situate; and
              (c) the references in articles 219 and 229 to the State shall be
       construed as a reference to the State in which the High Court has its
       principal seat:
       Provided that if such principal seat is in a Union territory, the references
in articles 219 and 229 to the Governor, Public Service Commission,
Legislature and Consolidated Fund of the State shall be construed respectively
as references to the President, Union Public Service Commission, Parliament
and Consolidated Fund of India.]

[232. Interpretation.—Articles 230, 231 and 232 subs. by articles 230
and 231 by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 16
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956)].
                          CHAPTER VI.—SUBORDINATE COURTS

233. Appointment of district judges.—(1) Appointments of persons to
109                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
be, and the posting and promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made
by the Governor of the State in consultation with the High Court exercising
jurisdiction in relation to such State.
       (2) A person not already in the service of the Union or of the State shall
only be eligible to be appointed a district judge if he has been for not less than
seven years an advocate or a pleader and is recommended by the High Court
for appointment.

[233A. Validation of appointments of, and judgments, etc.,
delivered by, certain district judges.—Notwithstanding any judgment,
decree or order of any court,—
              (a) (i) no appointment of any person already in the judicial service
       of a State or of any person who has been for not less than seven years an
       advocate or a pleader, to be a district judge in that State, and
               (ii) no posting, promotion or transfer of any such person as a
       district judge, made at any time before the commencement of the
       Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966, otherwise than in
       accordance with the provisions of article 233 or article 235 shall be
       deemed to be illegal or void or ever to have become illegal or void by
       reason only of the fact that such appointment, posting, promotion or
       transfer was not made in accordance with the said provisions;
           (b) no jurisdiction exercised, no judgment, decree, sentence or order
       passed or made, and no other act or proceeding done or taken, before the
       commencement of the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966
       by, or before, any person appointed, posted, promoted or transferred as a
       district judge in any State otherwise than in accordance with the
       provisions of article 233 or article 235 shall be deemed to be illegal or
       invalid or ever to have become illegal or invalid by reason only of the
       fact that such appointment, posting, promotion or transfer was not made
       in accordance with the said provisions.]

234. Recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judicial
service.—Appointments of persons other than district judges to the judicial service
of a State shall be made by the Governor of the State in accordance with rules made
by him in that behalf after consultation with the State Public Service Commission
and with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.
110                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

235. Control over subordinate courts.—The control over district
courts and courts subordinate thereto including the posting and promotion of,
and the grant of leave to, persons belonging to the judicial service of a State
and holding any post inferior to the post of district judge shall be vested in the
High Court, but nothing in this article shall be construed as taking away from
any such person any right of appeal which he may have under the law
regulating the conditions of his service or as authorising the High Court to deal
with him otherwise than in accordance with the conditions of his service
prescribed under such law.

236. Interpretation.—In this Chapter—
         (a) the expression “district judge” includes judge of a city civil court,
      additional district judge, joint district judge, assistant district judge, chief
      judge of a small cause court, chief presidency magistrate, additional
      chief presidency magistrate, sessions judge, additional sessions judge
      and assistant sessions Judge;
         (b) the expression “judicial service” means a service consisting
      exclusively of persons intended to fill the post of district judge and other
      civil judicial posts inferior to the post of district judge.

237. Application of the provisions of this Chapter to certain class or
classes of magistrates.—The Governor may by public notification direct that
the foregoing provisions of this Chapter and any rules made thereunder shall
with effect from such date as may be fixed by him in that behalf apply in
relation to any class or classes of magistrates in the State as they apply in
relation to persons appointed to the judicial service of the State subject to such
exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the notification.
               [The States in Part B of the First Schedule].
                          [THE UNION TERRITORIES]

[239. Administration of Union territories.—(1) Save as otherwise
provided by Parliament by law, every Union territory shall be administered by
the President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit, through an administrator to
be appointed by him with such designation as he may specify.
        (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Part VI, the President may
appoint the Governor of a State as the administrator of an adjoining Union
territory, and where a Governor is so appointed, he shall exercise his functions
as such administrator independently of his Council of Ministers.]
       *[239A. Creation of local Legislatures or Council of Ministers or
both for certain Union territories.—(1) Parliament may by law create 4[for
the Union territory of 5[Puducherry]]—
           (a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated and partly elected, to
       function as a Legislature for the Union territory, or
           (b) a Council of Ministers,
or both with such constitution, powers and functions, in each case, as may be
specified in the law.
      (2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) shall not be deemed to be
an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has the effect
of amending this Constitution.]
113                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
         [239AA. Special provisions with respect to Delhi.—(1) As from the
date of commencement of the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act,
1991, the Union territory of Delhi shall be called the National Capital Territory
of Delhi (hereafter in this Part referred to as the National Capital Territory) and
the administrator thereof appointed under article 239 shall be designated as the
Lieutenant Governor.
       (2)(a) There shall be a Legislative Assembly for the National Capital
Territory and the seats in such Assembly shall be filled by members chosen by
direct election from territorial constituencies in the National Capital Territory.
       (b) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly, the number of
seats reserved for Scheduled Castes, the division of the National Capital
Territory into territorial constituencies (including the basis for such division)
and all other matters relating to the functioning of the Legislative Assembly
shall be regulated by law made by Parliament.
         [(ba) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of
the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
       (bb) As nearly as may be, one-third of the seats reserved for the
Scheduled Castes in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory
of Delhi shall be reserved for women.
       (bc) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats to be
filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital
Territory of Delhi (including the numbers of seats reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes) shall be reserved for women in such
manner as Parliament may by law determine.]
       (c) The provisions of articles 324 to 327 and 329 shall apply in relation
to the National Capital Territory, the Legislative Assembly of the National
Capital Territory and the members thereof as they apply, in relation to a State,
the Legislative Assembly of a State and the members thereof respectively; and
any reference in articles 326 and 329 to “appropriate Legislature” shall be
deemed to be a reference to Parliament.
114                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
        (3) (a) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislative
Assembly shall have power to make laws for the whole or any part of the
National Capital Territory with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the
State List or in the Concurrent List in so far as any such matter is applicable to
Union territories except matters with respect to Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State
List and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to the said
Entries 1, 2 and 18.
        (b) Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall derogate from the powers of
Parliament under this Constitution to make laws with respect to any matter for
a Union territory or any part thereof.
        (c) If any provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly with
respect to any matter is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament
with respect to that matter, whether passed before or after the law made by the
Legislative Assembly, or of an earlier law, other than a law made by the
Legislative Assembly, then, in either case, the law made by Parliament, or, as
the case may be, such earlier law, shall prevail and the law made by the
Legislative Assembly shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void:
        Provided that if any such law made by the Legislative Assembly has
been reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his assent,
such law shall prevail in the National Capital Territory:
        Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall prevent Parliament
from enacting at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a
law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the
Legislative Assembly.
        (4) There shall be a Council of Ministers consisting of not more than ten
percent. of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly, with the
Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Lieutenant Governor in the
exercise of his functions in relation to matters with respect to which the
Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, except in so far as he is, by or
under any law, required to act in his discretion:
        Provided that in the case of difference of opinion between the Lieutenant
Governor and his Ministers on any matter, the Lieutenant Governor shall refer
it to the President for decision and act according to the decision given thereon
by the President and pending such decision it shall be competent for the
Lieutenant Governor in any case where the matter, in his opinion, is so urgent
that it is necessary for him to take immediate action, to take such action or to
give such direction in the matter as he deems necessary.
115                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
        (5) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the President and other
Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Chief
Minister and the Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the
President.
        (6) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the
Legislative Assembly.
          [(7) (a)] Parliament may, by law, make provisions for giving effect to,
or supplementing the provisions contained in the foregoing clauses and for all
matters incidental or consequential thereto.
          [(b) Any such law as is referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not be deemed
to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has the effect
of amending, this Constitution.]
         (8) The provisions of article 239B shall, so far as may be, apply in
relation to the National Capital Territory, the Lieutenant Governor and the
Legislative Assembly, as they apply in relation to the Union territory of
  [Puducherry], the administrator and its Legislature, respectively; and any
reference in that article to “clause (1) of article 239A” shall be deemed to be a
reference to this article or article 239AB, as the case may be.
        239AB. Provision in case of failure of constitutional machinery.—If
the President, on receipt of a report from the Lieutenant Governor or otherwise,
is satisfied—
             (a) that a situation has arisen in which the administration of the
      National Capital Territory cannot be carried on in accordance with the
      provisions of article 239AA or of any law made in pursuance of that
      article; or
             (b) that for the proper administration of the National Capital
      Territory it is necessary or expedient so to do,
the President may by order suspend the operation of any provision of article
239AA or of all or any of the provisions of any law made in pursuance of that
116                     THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
article for such period and subject to such conditions as may be specified in
such law and make such incidental and consequential provisions as may appear
to him to be necessary or expedient for administering the National Capital
Territory in accordance with the provisions of article 239 and article 239AA.]

[239B. Power of administrator to promulgate Ordinances during
recess of Legislature.—(1) If at any time, except when the Legislature of 2[the
Union territory of 3[Puducherry]] is in session, the administrator thereof is
satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take
immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances
appear to him to require:
        Provided that no such Ordinance shall be promulgated by the
administrator except after obtaining instructions from the President in that
behalf:
        Provided further that whenever the said Legislature is dissolved, or its
functioning remains suspended on account of any action taken under any such
law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, the administrator shall not
promulgate any Ordinance during the period of such dissolution or suspension.
        (2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article in pursuance of
instructions from the President shall be deemed to be an Act of the Legislature
of the Union territory which has been duly enacted after complying with the
provisions in that behalf contained in any such law as is referred to in clause (1)
of article 239A, but every such Ordinance—
               (a) shall be laid before the Legislature of the Union territory and
        shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly
        of the Legislature or if, before the expiration of that period, a resolution
        disapproving it is passed by the Legislature, upon the passing of the
        resolution; and
               (b) may be withdrawn at any time by the administrator after
        obtaining instructions from the President in that behalf.
        (3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision
which would not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of the Union
117                      THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
territory made after complying with the provisions in that behalf contained in
any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, it shall be void.]
          (4)*                        *                  *                    *

[240. Power of President to make regulations for certain Union
territories.—(1) The President may make regulations for the peace, progress
and good government of the Union territory of—
                (a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
                 [(b) Lakshadweep;]
                 [(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu;]
                 [(d) **** ;]
                 [(e) 7[Puducherry ];]
                 (f) * * *
                 (g) * * *
           [Provided that when any body is created under article 239A to function
as a Legislature for the Union territory of 7[Puducherry], the President shall not
make any regulation for the peace, progress and good government of that
Union territory with effect from the date appointed for the first meeting of the
Legislature:]
118                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
         [Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature
for the Union territory of 2[Puducherry] is dissolved, or the functioning of that
body as such Legislature remains suspended on account of any action taken
under any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, the President
may, during the period of such dissolution or suspension, make regulations for
the peace, progress and good government of that Union territory.]
       (2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amend any Act made by
Parliament or 3[any other law], which is for the time being applicable to the
Union territory and, when promulgated by the President, shall have the same
force and effect as an Act of Parliament which applies to that territory.]

241. High Courts for Union territories.—(1) Parliament may by law
constitute a High Court for a 4[Union territory] or declare any court in any
  [such territory] to be a High Court for all or any of the purposes of this
Constitution.
       (2) The provisions of Chapter V of Part VI shall apply in relation to
every High Court referred to in clause (1) as they apply in relation to a High
Court referred to in article 214 subject to such modifications or exceptions as
Parliament may by law provide.
         [(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the provisions
of any law of the appropriate Legislature made by virtue of powers conferred
on that Legislature by or under this Constitution, every High Court exercising
jurisdiction immediately before the commencement of the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, in relation to any Union territory shall
continue to exercise such jurisdiction in relation to that territory after such
commencement.
       (4) Nothing in this article derogates from the power of Parliament to
extend or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court for a State to, or from, any
Union territory or part thereof.]

242. [Coorg.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
                                     [PART IX
                               THE PANCHAYATS

243. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
            (a) “district” means a district in a State;
            (b) “Gram Sabha” means a body consisting of persons registered in
       the electoral rolls relating to a village comprised within the area of
       Panchayat at the village level;
            (c) “intermediate level” means a level between the village and
       district levels specified by the Governor of a State by public notification
       to be the intermediate level for the purposes of this Part;
            (d) “Panchayat” means an institution (by whatever name called) of
       self-government constituted under article 243B, for the rural areas;
            (e) “Panchayat area” means the territorial area of a Panchayat;
            (f) “Population” means the population as ascertained at the last
       preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published;
            (g) “village” means a village specified by the Governor by public
       notification to be a village for the purposes of this Part and includes a
       group of villages so specified.

243A. Gram Sabha.—A Gram Sabha may exercise such powers and
perform such functions at the village level as the Legislature of a State may, by
law, provide.

243B. Constitution of Panchayats.—(1) There shall be constituted in
every State, Panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels in
accordance with the provisions of this Part.
       (2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), Panchayats at the intermediate
level may not be constituted in a State having a population not exceeding
twenty lakhs.

243C. Composition of Panchayats.—(1) Subject to the provisions of
this Part, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect
to the composition of Panchayats:
120                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       Provided that the ratio between the population of the territorial area of a
Panchayat at any level and the number of seats in such Panchayat to be filled
by election shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State.
       (2) All the seats in a Panchayat shall be filled by persons chosen by
direct election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area and, for this
purpose, each Panchayat area shall be divided into territorial constituencies in
such manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the
number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout
the Panchayat area.
       (3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the
representation—
           (a) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the village level, in the
       Panchayats at the intermediate level or, in the case of a State not having
       Panchayats at the intermediate level, in the Panchayats at the district
       level;
           (b) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the intermediate level, in
       the Panchayats at the district level;
           (c) of the members of the House of the People and the members of
       the Legislative Assembly of the State representing constituencies which
       comprise wholly or partly a Panchayat area at a level other than the
       village level, in such Panchayat;
           (d) of the members of the Council of States and the members of the
       Legislative Council of the State, where they are registered as electors
       within—
                (i) a Panchayat area at the intermediate level, in Panchayat at the
           intermediate level;
                (ii) a Panchayat area at the district level, in Panchayat at the
           district level.
       (4) The Chairperson of a Panchayat and other members of a Panchayat
whether or not chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the
Panchayat area shall have the right to vote in the meetings of the Panchayats.
       (5) The Chairperson of—
           (a) a Panchayat at the village level shall be elected in such manner as
       the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide; and
           (b) a Panchayat at the intermediate level or district level shall be
       elected by, and from amongst, the elected members thereof.
121                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA