295. Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations
in other cases.—(1) As from the commencement of this Constitution—
             (a) all property and assets which immediately before such
      commencement were vested in any Indian State corresponding to a State
      specified in Part B of the First Schedule shall vest in the Union, if the
      purposes for which such property and assets were held immediately
      before such commencement will thereafter be purposes of the Union
      relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List, and
              (b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of any
      Indian State corresponding to a State specified in Part B of the First
      Schedule, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the
      rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of India, if the purposes
      for which such rights were acquired or liabilities or obligations were incurred
      before such commencement will thereafter be purposes of the Government
      of India relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List,
subject to any agreement entered into in that behalf by the Government of India
with the Government of that State.
       (2) Subject as aforesaid, the Government of each State specified in Part B
of the First Schedule shall, as from the commencement of this Constitution, be the
successor of the Government of the corresponding Indian State as regards all
property and assets and all rights, liabilities and obligations, whether arising out
of any contract or otherwise, other than those referred to in clause (1).

296. Property accruing by escheat or lapse or as bona vacantia.—
Subject as hereinafter provided, any property in the territory of India which, if
this Constitution had not come into operation, would have accrued to His Majesty
or, as the case may be, to the Ruler of an Indian State by escheat or lapse, or as
bona vacantia for want of a rightful owner, shall, if it is property situate in a
State, vest in such State, and shall, in any other case, vest in the Union:
169                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
       Provided that any property which at the date when it would have so
accrued to His Majesty or to the Ruler of an Indian State was in the possession
or under the control of the Government of India or the Government of a State
shall, according as the purposes for which it was then used or held were
purposes of the Union or of a State, vest in the Union or in that State.
      Explanation.—In this article, the expressions “Ruler” and “Indian State”
have the same meanings as in article 363.

[297. Things of value within territorial waters or continental shelf
and resources of the exclusive economic zone to vest in the Union.—(1) All
lands, minerals and other things of value underlying the ocean within the
territorial waters, or the continental shelf, or the exclusive economic zone, of
India shall vest in the Union and be held for the purposes of the Union.
       (2) All other resources of the exclusive economic zone of India shall also
vest in the Union and be held for the purposes of the Union.
       (3) The limits of the territorial waters, the continental shelf, the exclusive
economic zone, and other maritime zones, of India shall be such as may be
specified, from time to time, by or under any law made by Parliament.]

[298. Power to carry on trade, etc.—The executive power of the
Union and of each State shall extend to the carrying on of any trade or business
and to the acquisition, holding and disposal of property and the making of
contracts for any purpose:
       Provided that—
              (a) the said executive power of the Union shall, in so far as such
       trade or business or such purpose is not one with respect to which
       Parliament may make laws, be subject in each State to legislation by the
       State; and
              (b) the said executive power of each State shall, in so far as such
       trade or business or such purpose is not one with respect to which the
       State Legislature may make laws, be subject to legislation by
       Parliament.]
170                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

299. Contracts.—(1) All contracts made in the exercise of the executive
power of the Union or of a State shall be expressed to be made by the
President, or by the Governor 1*** of the State, as the case may be, and all such
contracts and all assurances of property made in the exercise of that power shall
be executed on behalf of the President or the Governor 1*** by such persons
and in such manner as he may direct or authorise.
       (2) Neither the President nor the Governor 2*** shall be personally liable
in respect of any contract or assurance made or executed for the purposes of
this Constitution, or for the purposes of any enactment relating to the
Government of India heretofore in force, nor shall any person making or
executing any such contract or assurance on behalf of any of them be
personally liable in respect thereof.

300. Suits and proceedings.—(1) The Government of India may sue or
be sued by the name of the Union of India and the Government of a State may
sue or be sued by the name of the State and may, subject to any provisions
which may be made by Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of such State
enacted by virtue of powers conferred by this Constitution, sue or be sued in
relation to their respective affairs in the like cases as the Dominion of India and
the corresponding Provinces or the corresponding Indian States might have
sued or been sued if this Constitution had not been enacted.
       (2) If at the commencement of this Constitution—
               (a) any legal proceedings are pending to which the Dominion of
       India is a party, the Union of India shall be deemed to be substituted for
       the Dominion in those proceedings; and
               (b) any legal proceedings are pending to which a Province or an
       Indian State is a party, the corresponding State shall be deemed to be
       substituted for the Province or the Indian State in those proceedings.
                             [CHAPTER IV.—RIGHT TO PROPERTY

300A. Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of
law.— No person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law.]
          TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE WITHIN THE
                              TERRITORY OF INDIA

301. Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse.—Subject to the
other provisions of this Part, trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the
territory of India shall be free.

302. Power of Parliament to impose restrictions on trade, commerce
and intercourse.—Parliament may by law impose such restrictions on the
freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse between one State and another or
within any part of the territory of India as may be required in the public
interest.

303. Restrictions on the legislative powers of the Union and of the
States with regard to trade and commerce.—(1) Notwithstanding anything
in article 302, neither Parliament nor the Legislature of a State shall have power
to make any law giving, or authorising the giving of, any preference to one
State over another, or making, or authorising the making of, any discrimination
between one State and another, by virtue of any entry relating to trade and
commerce in any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule.
        (2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent Parliament from making any law
giving, or authorising the giving of, any preference or making, or authorising
the making of, any discrimination if it is declared by such law that it is
necessary to do so for the purpose of dealing with a situation arising from
scarcity of goods in any part of the territory of India.

304. Restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse among
States.—Notwithstanding anything in article 301 or article 303, the
Legislature of a State may by law—
                (a) impose on goods imported from other States 1[or the Union
        territories] any tax to which similar goods manufactured or produced in
        that State are subject, so, however, as not to discriminate between goods
        so imported and goods so manufactured or produced; and
                (b) impose such reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade,
        commerce or intercourse with or within that State as may be required in
        the public interest:
172                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
        Provided that no Bill or amendment for the purposes of clause (b) shall
be introduced or moved in the Legislature of a State without the previous
sanction of the President.

[305. Saving of existing laws and laws providing for State
monopolies.—Nothing in articles 301 and 303 shall affect the provisions of
any existing law except in so far as the President may by order otherwise
direct; and nothing in article 301 shall affect the operation of any law made
before the commencement of the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955,
in so far as it relates to, or prevent Parliament or the Legislature of a State from
making any law relating to, any such matter as is referred to in sub-clause (ii)
of clause (6) of article 19.]

306. [Power of certain States in Part B of the First Schedule to
impose restrictions on trade and commerce.].—Omitted by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.(w.e.f. 1-11-1956)

307. Appointment of authority for carrying out the purposes of
articles 301 to 304.—Parliament may by law appoint such authority as it
considers appropriate for carrying out the purposes of articles 301, 302, 303
and 304, and confer on the authority so appointed such powers and such duties
as it thinks necessary.
            SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES
                              CHAPTER I.— SERVICES

308. Interpretation.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,
the expression “State” 1[does not include the State of Jammu and Kashmir].

309. Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the
Union or a State.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Acts of the
appropriate Legislature may regulate the recruitment, and conditions of service
of persons appointed, to public services and posts in connection with the affairs
of the Union or of any State:
       Provided that it shall be competent for the President or such person as he
may direct in the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the
Union, and for the Governor 2*** of a State or such person as he may direct in
the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State, to
make rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons
appointed, to such services and posts until provision in that behalf is made by
or under an Act of the appropriate Legislature under this article, and any rules
so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any such Act.

310. Tenure of office of persons serving the Union or a State.—(1)
Except as expressly provided by this Constitution, every person who is a
member of a defence service or of a civil service of the Union or of an
all-India service or holds any post connected with defence or any civil post
under the Union holds office during the pleasure of the President, and every
person who is a member of a civil service of a State or holds any civil post
under a State holds office during the pleasure of the Governor 3*** of the
State.
       (2) Notwithstanding that a person holding a civil post under the Union or
a State holds office during the pleasure of the President or, as the case may be,
of the Governor 2*** of the State, any contract under which a person, not being
a member of a defence service or of an all-India service or of a civil service of
the Union or a State, is appointed under this Constitution to hold such a post
may, if the President or the Governor 42***, as the case may be, deems it
174                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
necessary in order to secure the services of a person having special
qualifications, provide for the payment to him of compensation, if before the
expiration of an agreed period that post is abolished or he is, for reasons not
connected with any misconduct on his part, required to vacate that post.

311. Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in
civil capacities under the Union or a State.—(1) No person who is a member
of a civil service of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service of a
State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or
removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
         [(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or
reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the
charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
respect of those charges 2***:
         [Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon
him any such penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of the
evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such
person any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed:
       Provided further that this clause shall not apply—]
               (a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on
       the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal
       charge; or
               (b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person
       or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded
       by that authority in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such
       inquiry; or
               (c) where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is
       satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State it is not expedient
       to hold such inquiry.
       (3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question arises
whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry as is referred to in
clause (2), the decision thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or
remove such person or to reduce him in rank shall be final.]
175                    THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

312. All-India services.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in 1[Chapter VI
of Part VI or Part XI], if the Council of States has declared by resolution
supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting that it
is necessary or expedient in the national interest so to do, Parliament may by
law provide for the creation of one or more all India services 2[(including an
all-India judicial service)] common to the Union and the States, and, subject to
the other provisions of this Chapter, regulate the recruitment, and the
conditions of service of persons appointed, to any such service.
       (2) The services known at the commencement of this Constitution as the
Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service shall be deemed to
be services created by Parliament under this article.
        [(3) The all-India judicial service referred to in clause (1) shall not
include any post inferior to that of a district judge as defined in article 236.
      (4) The law providing for the creation of the all-India judicial service
aforesaid may contain such provisions for the amendment of Chapter VI of
Part VI as may be necessary for giving effect to the provisions of that law and
no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the
purposes of article 368.]

[312A. Power of Parliament to vary or revoke conditions of service
of officers of certain services.—(1) Parliament may by law—
              (a) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the
       conditions of services as respects remuneration, leave and pension and
       the rights as respects disciplinary matters of persons who, having been
       appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a
       civil service of the Crown in India before the commencement of this
       Constitution, continue on and after the commencement of the
       Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972, to serve under the
       Government of India or of a State in any service or post;
176                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
             (b) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the
      conditions of service as respects pension of persons who, having been
      appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a
      civil service of the Crown in India before the commencement of this
      Constitution, retired or otherwise ceased to be in service at any time
      before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-eighth
      Amendment) Act, 1972:
       Provided that in the case of any such person who is holding or has held
the office of the Chief Justice or other Judge of the Supreme Court or a High
Court, the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, the Chairman or other
member of the Union or a State Public Service Commission or the Chief
Election Commissioner, nothing in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) shall be
construed as empowering Parliament to vary or revoke, after his appointment
to such post, the conditions of his service to his disadvantage except in so far as
such conditions of service are applicable to him by reason of his being a
person appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a
civil service of the Crown in India.
        (2) Except to the extent provided for by Parliament by law under this
article, nothing in this article shall affect the power of any Legislature or other
authority under any other provision of this Constitution to regulate the
conditions of service of persons referred to in clause (1).
      (3) Neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in—
             (a) any dispute arising out of any provision of, or any
      endorsement on, any covenant, agreement or other similar instrument
      which was entered into or executed by any person referred to in
      clause (1), or arising out of any letter issued to such person, in relation to
      his appointment to any civil service of the Crown in India or his
      continuance in service under the Government of the Dominion of India
      or a Province thereof;
            (b) any dispute in respect of any right, liability or obligation
      under article 314 as originally enacted.
      (4) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding
anything in article 314 as originally enacted or in any other provision of this
Constitution.]
177                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

313. Transitional provisions.—Until other provision is made in this
behalf under this Constitution, all the laws in force immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution and applicable to any public service or any
post which continues to exist after the commencement of this Constitution, as
an all-India service or as service or post under the Union or a State shall
continue in force so far as consistent with the provisions of this Constitution.

314. [Provision for protection of existing officers of certain services.].—
Omitted by the Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972,
s. 3 (w.e.f. 29-8-1972).
                   CHAPTER II.— PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONS

315. Public Service Commissions for the Union and for the States.—
(1) Subject to the provisions of this article, there shall be a Public Service
Commission for the Union and a Public Service Commission for each State.
       (2) Two or more States may agree that there shall be one Public Service
Commission for that group of States, and if a resolution to that effect is passed
by the House or, where there are two Houses, by each House of the Legislature
of each of those States, Parliament may by law provide for the appointment of a
Joint State Public Service Commission (referred to in this Chapter as Joint
Commission) to serve the needs of those States.
       (3) Any such law as aforesaid may contain such incidental and
consequential provisions as may be necessary or desirable for giving effect to
the purposes of the law.
       (4) The Public Service Commission for the Union, if requested so to do
by the Governor 1*** of a State, may, with the approval of the President, agree
to serve all or any of the needs of the State.
       (5) References in this Constitution to the Union Public Service
Commission or a State Public Service Commission shall, unless the context
otherwise requires, be construed as references to the Commission serving the
needs of the Union or, as the case may be, the State as respects the particular
matter in question.

316. Appointment and term of office of members.—(1) The Chairman
and other members of a Public Service Commission shall be appointed, in the
case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, by the President, and in
the case of a State Commission, by the Governor of the State:
178                   THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
        Provided that as nearly as may be one-half of the members of every
Public Service Commission shall be persons who at the dates of their respective
appointments have held office for at least ten years either under the
Government of India or under the Government of a State, and in computing the
said period of ten years any period before the commencement of this
Constitution during which a person has held office under the Crown in India or
under the Government of an Indian State shall be included.
          [(1A) If the office of the Chairman of the Commission becomes vacant
or if any such Chairman is by reason of absence or for any other reason unable
to perform the duties of his office, those duties shall, until some person
appointed under clause (1) to the vacant office has entered on the duties thereof
or, as the case may be, until the Chairman has resumed his duties, be performed
by such one of the other members of the Commission as the President, in the
case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, and the Governor of the
State in the case of a State Commission, may appoint for the purpose.]
        (2) A member of a Public Service Commission shall hold office for a
term of six years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he
attains, in the case of the Union Commission, the age of sixty-five years, and in
the case of a State Commission or a Joint Commission, the age of 2[sixty-two
years], whichever is earlier:
        Provided that—
             (a) a member of a Public Service Commission may, by writing under
        his hand addressed, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint
        Commission, to the President, and in the case of a State Commission, to
        the Governor 3*** of the State, resign his office;
             (b) a member of a Public Service Commission may be removed from
        his office in the manner provided in clause (1) or clause (3) of
        article 317.
        (3) A person who holds office as a member of a Public Service
Commission shall, on the expiration of his term of office, be ineligible for
re-appointment to that office.
179                  THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

317. Removal and suspension of a member of a Public Service
Commission.—(1) Subject to the provisions of clause (3), the Chairman or
any other member of a Public Service Commission shall only be removed from
his office by order of the President on the ground of misbehaviour after the
Supreme Court, on reference being made to it by the President, has, on inquiry
held in accordance with the procedure prescribed in that behalf under
article 145, reported that the Chairman or such other member, as the case may
be, ought on any such ground to be removed.
       (2) The President, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint
Commission, and the Governor 1*** in the case of a State Commission, may
suspend from office the Chairman or any other member of the Commission in
respect of whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court under
clause (1) until the President has passed orders on receipt of the report of the
Supreme Court on such reference.
       (3) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), the President may by order
remove from office the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service
Commission if the Chairman or such other member, as the case may be,—
          (a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
          (b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside
       the duties of his office; or
          (c) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by
       reason of infirmity of mind or body.
       (4) If the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service
Commission is or becomes in any way concerned or interested in any contract
or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of India or the
Government of a State or participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any
benefit or emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a member and in
common with the other members of an incorporated company, he shall, for the
purposes of clause (1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour.

318. Power to make regulations as to conditions of service of
members and staff of the Commission.—In the case of the Union
Commission or a Joint Commission, the President and, in the case of a State
Commission, the Governor 1*** of the State may by regulations—
180                 THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
           (a) determine the number of members of the Commission and their
       conditions of service; and
           (b) make provision with respect to the number of members of the
       staff of the Commission and their conditions of service:
       Provided that the conditions of service of a member of a Public Service
Commission shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.

319. Prohibition as to the holding of offices by members of
Commission on ceasing to be such members.—On ceasing to hold office—
           (a) the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission shall be
       ineligible for further employment either under the Government of India
       or under the Government of a State;
           (b) the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission shall be
       eligible for appointment as the Chairman or any other member of the
       Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of any other State
       Public Service Commission, but not for any other employment either
       under the Government of India or under the Government of a State;
           (c) a member other than the Chairman of the Union Public Service
       Commission shall be eligible for appointment as the Chairman of the
       Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of a State Public
       Service Commission, but not for any other employment either under the
       Government of India or under the Government of a State;
           (d) a member other than the Chairman of a State Public Service
       Commission shall be eligible for appointment as the Chairman or any
       other member of the Union Public Service Commission or as the
       Chairman of that or any other State Public Service Commission, but not
       for any other employment either under the Government of India or under
       the Government of a State.